
Skip to main content
Full text of "Julian Assange, Jacob Appelbaum etc - Cypherpunks Freedom & the Future of the Internet.pdf (PDFy mirror)"
See other formats

lKvHdPvmrEJ0c4ez5pZePTihfjRbqlS5gZ9hwJPCKzLZu+pEr7 
5FlYlxa4PPadJZWr6zVkWhioSNDzmM/UcioAHfp093ArZ2BJImD 
-NszecdfP22/hFqOFwlO/mJXNK+guiWGhOOKzKnBelOtMeXLCHY 
Ml - ' 5BZlVYh/3 1 "" " 5 2mOnWfTUp9mjdyV+nlupQOQ 

1kub5B» ABT4J5dxysyWwioYT|si9k 
lEROvzllAK'" _j lwhCr92> ■P9J6gXNUBVuP6UK2p 

^BrieSN^' ,lSVr2KCV' 1 * r *vg36kycS+8zQxJeJ10i 

(. .wYEgAF PNvMAp wuhcql55D301 

>Afb... . ..^glEAUjlSxcL _^yvw40BcFyy9dLzXCdUag 

^TukDvCTIuQkQ6f|RkTv'SGyEvY4 t ■ c ■' brct5Ma-l-v4214T8X.Ldl 
i '"'R4jClw/VgsWt+vW n 

^^^^^^ .., U rtja7tmJtP 

,YZKE77i2j^^ "^^BcOVfiMQ wlODUNg 



Le0ak96OCw|Vhus9LZ/EFBLLPPN 
XnnsUKN7l IYRvnnRiiYwHi37Ur/t 



sEiCPYUnlw+^ 



v74Nme5i33cpUUH4oHPsYrAwnw : 



zSCHtu094dz/tLc5GuHLi 
A/gnqEJvlT/zWUgdg/'kXuc 



JkNBeTqtP/f9E7Pg+r6r5j8icb 

*fnNr' pMCk ™™ u rzdrriizpxfijjj 

ilr VwZ7njl. 



trVWt4L27bi 
7/tLHuewfZ4fObN5Y4i 

r 

.vHLIWiHr, 
nwuzDtc+JTI 



nKYSf/wpl9. 
■ttUTE 



eBht 
'quWSqpuaNc 
'kN2KSdzDKHPc 
QIVtK.MhYrmLGTPy^ 
&NZgyzAlyYHFZj6TW 
6wMxCvJBuNf4W2F 
F ltLLHIGJwxVflzODJ 
'QNOPzRRJjaMB60EUjV 
kbvY74pfiByi7n38Hju 
lx41mDF2hZqNDsGMmuMT 
'SvOfhcvRJdUDCanVOz/QH 
^worAwwWFjP + NjZSArqMla 
r dDaa6/RszcveoCCJ+ 
'q7Cl+iJNWuHUpnTuxJpY3 
r cwl+y+XZT4WVFyJKVUSChjzxO 
* LAefLDNuet q 
JgKPMOjl4; gp 
J h9jJB7mlqM sl+q 
StvYbGaa H c 8V qf aV r6y :1b 

YCpvLSyxOr >LE81 
DANSU7pdC 
Fpkk9B9aHfpwo< 
!6lkaz9xaW6dAXBXaCJpii 
9jlREZCCw 
KL6aDtX/fPi 



f/J5Xu0wqTVrlyGJvJ + 
f nCFKj/HdE/w k " 
YcUlTjJzMHc 

/SXs4Hx4ge 



jXI 



.oh 



>'3/z 
nKn- 
3U4( 
'I hv 
ny 
Z64- 



jHxIKi 



VjZH. 
RclPi 
qqox 
50aljM. 
7g9PY 
3)k 

oKV-" 



frNN/sPC 
w 5yuA 



■.V w + 

iUCL70a.£ 



.jh 



lqz6iTKjXvq?[ 



XTyiQw 

5*+NgZ5SVzTApyhzKmHqt4ZbULyA0cDw 
' -'iGYn3l2EsqTLrWMXBrjlwqPzqpHSBrQksOlcEByQkeoa6 
" "^?;kKEPGy4T4yekyogJcuSDMtcjriTpt2ik 
IXh5DSt H - DQxPBC r i',A:"Jt2 ^ci„: 

B B a M y h 5 1 0 Q Gli S/ g 

1" . . ^NGvHFeXbPhqS55SCOmTkZ3yxqpUZpTLTOinz2 

-,j.yZTLMVzrszb4mSoN04Ci8awAMdAgA]TITzREJIRaNWN 
:nmBS.:3nL*'RDfDM80wBWOYTtKK4tsgzblOV , ;ik _vKe! . i FLU /'' 

cCSZSooUyl " ■■'MRUUI/Pgz*l0q J q. tiD'j 
r rVhkhfTlRZ -4SluxSZdWmtugAWk 

JsRXRWrjCPkfo5nkuo5dSEPijfr ^TgSJqW+CTZXJqdzF 

-^Bh, lC ^fi 3d9oBvUHeMmlTiiU7g , i7/r 
0 Saw DA :J 4v .c! Of ^ J Shy f. i 

Ncl v , „„ . ~. , j//qLmqm7a80c:QmtQnLqHq 

u4Lf7yyiZtgYJqJBmaJ/LhMlfKZzFuliPeJC90gK2rE9ntMeh5 
:iegwAtpHEG/ZQ2+lLmb5P07yx9p + 5fNDqkMeDwKnjJQPLIIcsa 



THE INTERNET IS A THREAT 

TO HUMAN CIVILIZATION 

—JULIAN ASSANGE, FROM THE INTRODUCTION TO CYPHERPUNKS 



The Internet has led to revolutions across the world but a crackdown is now 
in full swing. As whole societies move online, mass surveillance programs 
are being deployed globally. Our civilization has reached a crossroads. In one 
direction lies a future promoting "privacy for the weak and transparency for 
the powerful"; in the other is an internet that transfers power over entire 
populations to an unaccountable complex of spy agencies and their trans- 
national corporate allies. 

Cypherpunks are activists who advocate the mass use of strong 
cryptography as a way protecting our basic freedoms against this onslaught. 
Julian Assange, the editor-in-chief of and visionary behind WikiLeaks, has 
been a leading voice in the cypherpunk movement since the 1990s. Now, in 
a timely and important new book, Assange brings together a group of rebel 
thinkers and activists from the front line of the battle for cyberspace to dis- 
cuss whether the internet will emancipate or enslave all of us. 

JULIAN ASSANGE is the editor in chief of WikiLeaks 
and the recipient of the 2009 Amnesty Interna- 
tional New Media Award, the 2011 Sydney Peace 
Foundation Gold Medal, the 2011 Walkley Award 
for Journalism, and the 2011 Martha Gellhorn 
Prize. An original contributor to the cypherpunk 
mailing list, he is the creator of numerous soft- 
ware projects in line with cypherpunk philosophy, 
including the Rubberhose encryption system and 
the original code for WikiLeaks. He is the co- 
author (with Sulette Dreyfus) of Underground, a 
history of the international hacker movement. 




OR Books 

www.orbooks.com 

Author photo ©Allen Clark Photography 
Cover photo © Wikimedia Commons 
Cover design by Bathcat Ltd. 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JULIAN ASSANGE 



CYPHERPUNKS 

FREEDOM and the FUTURE 
of the INTERNET 

JULIAN 

ASSANGE 

with JACOB APPELBAUM 
ANDY MOLLER-MAGUHN 
and JEREMIE ZIMMERMANN 



0 

R 



OR Books 
New York ■ London 



© 2012 Julian Assange 

Published by OR Books, New York and London 
Visit our website at www.orbooks.com 

First printing 2012 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, 
recording, or any information storage retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publisher, except brief passages for review purposes. 

Cataloging-in-Publication data is available from the Library of Congress. 
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library. 

ISBN 978-1-939293-00-8 paperback 
ISBN 978-1-939293-01-5 e-book 

This book is set in the typeface Minion. 
Typeset by Lapiz Digital, Chennai, India. 

Printed by BookMobile in the United States and CPI Books Ltd in the United 
Kingdom. The U.S. printed edition of this book comes on Forest Stewardship 
Council-certified, 30% recycled paper. The printer, BookMobile, is 100% 
wind-powered. 



WHAT IS A CYPHERPUNK? 



Cypherpunks advocate for the use of cryptography and similar 
methods as ways to achieve societal and political change. 1 Founded 
in the early 1990s, the movement has been most active during the 
1990s "cryptowars" and following the 2011 internet spring. The 
term cypherpunk, derived from (cryptographic) cipher and punk, 
was added to the Oxford English Dictionary in 2006. 2 



CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION: A CALL TO CRYPTOGRAPHIC ARMS 1 

DISCUSSION PARTICIPANTS 7 

EDITOR'S NOTE 11 

NOTE ON THE VARIOUS ATTEMPTS TO PERSECUTE WIKILEAKS 

AND PEOPLE ASSOCIATED WITH IT 13 

INCREASED COMMUNICATION VERSUS 

INCREASED SURVEILLANCE 21 

THE MILITARIZATION OF CYBERSPACE 33 

FIGHTING TOTAL SURVEILLANCE WITH THE LAWS OF MAN 41 

PRIVATE SECTOR SPYING 51 
FIGHTING TOTAL SURVEILLANCE WITH 

THE LAWS OF PHYSICS 59 

THE INTERNET AND POLITICS 67 

THE INTERNET AND ECONOMICS 87 

CENSORSHIP 113 
PRIVACY FOR THE WEAK, TRANSPARENCY 

FOR THE POWERFUL 141 

RATS IN THE OPERA HOUSE 149 

ENDNOTES 163 



INTRODUCTION: A CALL TO CRYPTOGRAPHIC 
ARMS 



This book is not a manifesto. There is not time for that. This book is 
a warning. 

The world is not sliding, but galloping into a new transnational 
dystopia. This development has not been properly recognized outside 
of national security circles. It has been hidden by secrecy, complexity 
and scale. The internet, our greatest tool of emancipation, has been 
transformed into the most dangerous facilitator of totalitarianism we 
have ever seen. The internet is a threat to human civilization. 

These transformations have come about silently, because those 
who know what is going on work in the global surveillance industry 
and have no incentives to speak out. Left to its own trajectory, within 
a few years, global civilization will be a postmodern surveillance 
dystopia, from which escape for all but the most skilled individuals 
will be impossible. In fact, we may already be there. 

While many writers have considered what the internet means 
for global civilization, they are wrong. They are wrong because they 
do not have the sense of perspective that direct experience brings. 
They are wrong because they have never met the enemy. 

No description of the world survives first contact with the 
enemy. 



1 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



We have met the enemy. 

Over the last six years WikiLeaks has had conflicts with nearly 
every powerful state. We know the new surveillance state from an 
insiders perspective, because we have plumbed its secrets. We know 
it from a combatant's perspective, because we have had to protect our 
people, our finances and our sources from it. We know it from a global 
perspective, because we have people, assets and information in nearly 
every country. We know it from the perspective of time, because we 
have been fighting this phenomenon for years and have seen it dou- 
ble and spread, again and again. It is an invasive parasite, growing fat 
off societies that merge with the internet. It is rolling over the planet, 
infecting all states and peoples before it. 

What is to be done? 

Once upon a time in a place that was neither here nor there, 
we, the constructors and citizens of the young internet discussed the 
future of our new world. 

We saw that the relationships between all people would be 
mediated by our new world, and that the nature of states, which are 
defined by how people exchange information, economic value, and 
force, would also change. 

We saw that the merger between existing state structures and 
the internet created an opening to change the nature of states. 

First, recall that states are systems through which coercive force 
flows. Factions within a state may compete for support, leading to dem- 
ocratic surface phenomena, but the underpinnings of states are the 
systematic application, and avoidance, of violence. Land ownership, 
property, rents, dividends, taxation, court fines, censorship, copyrights 



2 



CYPHERPUNKS 



and trademarks are all enforced by the threatened application of state 
violence. 

Most of the time we are not even aware of how close to 
violence we are, because we all grant concessions to avoid it. Like 
sailors smelling the breeze, we rarely contemplate how our surface 
world is propped up from below by darkness. 

In the new space of the internet what would be the mediator of 
coercive force? 

Does it even make sense to ask this question? In this otherworldly 
space, this seemingly platonic realm of ideas and information flow, 
could there be a notion of coercive force? A force that could modify 
historical records, tap phones, separate people, transform complexity 
into rubble, and erect walls, like an occupying army? 

The platonic nature of the internet, ideas and information flows, 
is debased by its physical origins. Its foundations are fiber optic cable 
lines stretching across the ocean floors, satellites spinning above our 
heads, computer servers housed in buildings in cities from New York 
to Nairobi. Like the soldier who slew Archimedes with a mere sword, 
so too could an armed militia take control of the peak development 
of Western civilization, our platonic realm. 

The new world of the internet, abstracted from the old world of 
brute atoms, longed for independence. But states and their friends 
moved to control our new world — by controlling its physical underpin- 
nings. The state, like an army around an oil well, or a customs agent 
extracting bribes at the border, would soon learn to leverage its control 
of physical space to gain control over our platonic realm. It would pre- 
vent the independence we had dreamed of, and then, squatting on fiber 
optic lines and around satellite ground stations, it would go on to mass 



3 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



intercept the information flow of our new world — its very essence — 
even as every human, economic, and political relationship embraced it. 
The state would leech into the veins and arteries of our new societies, 
gobbling up every relationship expressed or communicated, every web 
page read, every message sent and every thought googled, and then store 
this knowledge, billions of interceptions a day, undreamed of power, in 
vast top secret warehouses, forever. It would go on to mine and mine 
again this treasure, the collective private intellectual output of human- 
ity, with ever more sophisticated search and pattern finding algorithms, 
enriching the treasure and maximizing the power imbalance between 
interceptors and the world of interceptees. And then the state would 
reflect what it had learned back into the physical world, to start wars, to 
target drones, to manipulate UN committees and trade deals, and to do 
favors for its vast connected network of industries, insiders and cronies. 

But we discovered something. Our one hope against total domi- 
nation. A hope that with courage, insight and solidarity we could use 
to resist. A strange property of the physical universe that we live in. 

The universe believes in encryption. 

It is easier to encrypt information than it is to decrypt it. 

We saw we could use this strange property to create the laws of 
a new world. To abstract away our new platonic realm from its base 
underpinnings of satellites, undersea cables and their controllers. To 
fortify our space behind a cryptographic veil. To create new lands 
barred to those who control physical reality, because to follow us into 
them would require infinite resources. 

And in this manner to declare independence. 

Scientists in the Manhattan Project discovered that the uni- 
verse permitted the construction of a nuclear bomb. This was not an 



4 



CYPHERPUNKS 



obvious conclusion. Perhaps nuclear weapons were not within the 
laws of physics. However, the universe believes in atomic bombs and 
nuclear reactors. They are a phenomenon the universe blesses, like 
salt, sea or stars. 

Similarly, the universe, our physical universe, has that property 
that makes it possible for an individual or a group of individuals to 
reliably, automatically, even without knowing, encipher something, so 
that all the resources and all the political will of the strongest super- 
power on earth may not decipher it. And the paths of encipherment 
between people can mesh together to create regions free from the 
coercive force of the outer state. Free from mass interception. Free 
from state control. 

In this way, people can oppose their will to that of a fully mobi- 
lized superpower and win. Encryption is an embodiment of the laws of 
physics, and it does not listen to the bluster of states, even transnational 
surveillance dystopias. 

It isn't obvious that the world had to work this way. But somehow 
the universe smiles on encryption. 

Cryptography is the ultimate form of non-violent direct action. 

While nuclear weapons states can exert unlimited violence over 
even millions of individuals, strong cryptography means that a state, 
even by exercising unlimited violence, cannot violate the intent of 
individuals to keep secrets from them. 

Strong cryptography can resist an unlimited application of vio- 
lence. No amount of coercive force will ever solve a math problem. 

But could we take this strange fact about the world and build it 
up to be a basic emancipatory building block for the independence 
of mankind in the platonic realm of the internet? And as societies 



5 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



merged with the internet could that liberty then be reflected back 
into physical reality to redefine the state? 

Recall that states are the systems which determine where and 
how coercive force is consistently applied. 

The question of how much coercive force can seep into the pla- 
tonic realm of the internet from the physical world is answered by 
cryptography and the cypherpunks' ideals. 

As states merge with the internet and the future of our civili- 
zation becomes the future of the internet, we must redefine force 
relations. 

If we do not, the universality of the internet will merge global 
humanity into one giant grid of mass surveillance and mass control. 

We must raise an alarm. This book is a watchman's shout in the 
night. 

On March 20, 2012, while under house arrest in the United 
Kingdom awaiting extradition, I met with three friends and fellow 
watchmen on the principle that perhaps in unison our voices can 
wake up the town. We must communicate what we have learned 
while there is still a chance for you, the reader, to understand and act 
on what is happening. 

It is time to take up the arms of our new world, to fight for our- 
selves and for those we love. 

Our task is to secure self-determination where we can, to hold 
back the coming dystopia where we cannot, and if all else fails, to 
accelerate its self-destruction. 

— Julian Assange, London, October 2012 



6 



DISCUSSION PARTICIPANTS 



JULIAN ASSANGE is the editor in chief of and visionary behind 
WikiLeaks. 3 An original contributor to the Cypherpunk mailing list, 
Julian is now one of the most prominent exponents of cypherpunk 
philosophy in the world. His work with WikiLeaks has given polit- 
ical currency to the traditional cypherpunk juxtaposition: "privacy 
for the weak, transparency for the powerful." While his most visible 
work involves robust exercise of the freedom of expression to force 
transparency and accountability on powerful institutions, he is also 
an incisive critic of state and corporate encroachment upon the pri- 
vacy of individuals. Julian is the author of numerous software proj- 
ects in line with the cypherpunk philosophy, such as the first TCP/IP 
port scanner strobe.c, the rubberhose deniable encryption file sys- 
tem, and the original code for WikiLeaks. 4 In his teens Julian was an 
early computer and network security researcher, before some kinds 
of hacking were defined in law as criminal activity. Subsequently an 
activist and internet service provider to Australia during the 1990s, 
Julian has also co-written a history of the international hacker move- 
ment with Sulette Dreyfus, titled Underground, upon which the 
movie Underground: The Julian Assange Story was loosely based. 5 



7 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB APPELBAUM is a founder of Noisebridge in San Francisco, a 
member of the Berlin Chaos Computer Club and a developer. 6 Jacob 
is an advocate and a researcher for the Tor Project, which is an 
online anonymity system for all people to resist surveillance and to 
circumvent internet censorship. 7 His focus for the last decade has 
been helping environmental and human rights activists. Toward this 
goal he has published novel security, privacy and anonymity-related 
research in a number of areas from computer forensics to medi- 
cal marijuana. Jacob believes that everybody has the right to read, 
without restriction, and the right to speak freely, with no exception. 
In 2010, when Julian Assange could not deliver a talk in New York, 
Jacob gave the talk instead. Since then he, his friends and his family 
have been harassed by the United States government: interrogated at 
airports, subjected to invasive pat-downs while being threatened with 
implied impending prison rape by law enforcement officials, had 
his equipment confiscated and his online services subject to secret 
subpoena. Jacob is uncowed by these measures, continues to fight 
ongoing legal issues, and remains an outspoken advocate of freedom 
of expression, and a vocal supporter of WikiLeaks. 

AN DY M U LLE R-M AGU H N is a long-time member of the Chaos Computer 
Club in Germany, former board member and spokesman. 8 He is one 
of the co-founders of EDRI, European Digital Rights, an NGO for the 
enforcement of human rights in the digital age. 9 From 2000 to 2003 he 
was elected by European internet users to be the European Director of 
ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, 
which is responsible for worldwide policies for how the "names and 
numbers" of the internet should run. 10 He is a specialist on telecom- 



8 



CYPHERPUNKS 



munication and other surveillance, working in a journalistic capacity 
on the surveillance industry with his project wiki, buggedplanet.info. 11 
Andy works in cryptographic communications and created with 
others a company called Cryptophone, which markets secure voice 
communication devices to commercial clients and is providing strate- 
gic consultancy in the context of network architecture. 12 

JEREMIE ZIMMERMANN is the co-founder and spokesperson for the 
citizen advocacy group La Quadrature du Net, the most prominent 
European organization defending anonymity rights online and pro- 
moting awareness of regulatory attacks on online freedoms. 13 Jeremie 
works to build tools for the public to use to take part in public debate 
and to try to change things. He is mostly involved with the copyright 
wars, the debate around net neutrality and other regulatory issues 
that are crucial for the future of a free internet. Recently, his group La 
Quadrature du Net had a historic success in European politics, suc- 
cessfully marshaling a public campaign to defeat the Anti-Counterfeit 
and Trade Agreement (ACTA) in the European Parliament. Shortly 
after participating in the discussion that forms the basis of this book, 
Jeremie was stopped by two FBI officers while leaving the United 
States, and was interrogated about WikiLeaks. 



9 



EDITOR'S NOTE 



To increase Cypherpunks accessibility to a general reader, each of 
the participants in the original discussion was given an opportunity 
to substantially expand on, clarify and footnote their points. The 
order of the edited manuscript in general adheres to the dynamic of 
the original discussion. 



1 1 



NOTE ON THE VARIOUS 
PERSECUTE WIKILEAKS 
ASSOCIATED WITH IT 



ATTEMPTS TO 
AND PEOPLE 



At several points in the following discussion references are made to 
recent events in the story of WikiLeaks and its publishing efforts. 
These may be obscure to readers unfamiliar with the story of 
WikiLeaks, so they are summarized here at the outset. 

It is WikiLeaks' mission to receive information from whis- 
tleblowers, release it to the public, and then defend against the 
inevitable legal and political attacks. It is a routine occurrence for 
powerful states and organizations to attempt to suppress WikiLeaks 
publications, and as the publisher of last resort this is one of the 
hardships WikiLeaks was built to endure. 

In 2010 WikiLeaks engaged in its most famous publications 
to date, revealing systematic abuse of official secrecy within the US 
military and government. These publications are known as Collat- 
eral Murder, the War Logs, and Cablegate. 14 The response has been 
a concerted and ongoing effort to destroy WikiLeaks by the US gov- 
ernment and its allies. 

THE WIKILEAKS GRAND JURY 

As a direct consequence of WikiLeaks' publications the US govern- 
ment launched a multi-agency criminal investigation into Julian 



13 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



Assange and WikiLeaks staff, supporters and alleged associates. 
A Grand Jury was convened in Alexandria, Virginia, with the support 
of the Department of Justice and the FBI to look into the possibility of 
bringing charges, including conspiracy charges under the Espionage 
Act 1917, against Julian Assange and others. US officials have said that 
the investigation is of "unprecedented scale and nature." In Grand Jury 
proceedings no judge or defense counsel is present. Congressional 
committee hearings have since heard the suggestion from members of 
the US Congress that the Espionage Act could be used as a tool to tar- 
get journalists who "knowingly publish leaked information," suggest- 
ing that the approach is being normalized in the US justice system. 15 

At the date of publication, the WikiLeaks investigation continues. 16 
Several people have been legally compelled to give evidence. Court 
proceedings in the trial of Bradley Manning, the soldier accused of 
passing information to WikiLeaks, reveal an FBI file on the investigation 
of WikiLeaks that runs to over 42,100 pages, some 8,000 of which refer 
to Manning. Bradley Manning has been detained without trial for over 
880 days. UN Special Rapporteur for Torture, Juan Mendez, formally 
found that Bradley Manning had been treated in a manner which was 
cruel and inhuman, and which possibly amounted to torture. 17 

CALLS FOR THE ASSASSINATION OF JULIAN ASSANGE AND PUBLICLY 
DECLARED WIKILEAKS TASK FORCES 

The Grand Jury investigation is not the only avenue of attack on 
WikiLeaks. In December 2010, in the wake of Cablegate, various 
active US politicians called for the extrajudicial assassination of Julian 
Assange, including by drone strike. US senators labeled WikiLeaks 
a "terrorist organization" and named Assange a "high-tech terrorist" 
and an "enemy combatant" engaged in "cyber warfare." 18 



14 



CYPHERPUNKS 



A 120-strong US Pentagon team called the WildLeaks Task 
Force, or WTF, was set up ahead of the release of the Iraq War Logs 
and Cablegate, dedicated to "taking action" against WikiLeaks. Simi- 
lar publicly declared task forces in the FBI, the CIA and the US State 
Department are also still in operation. 19 

DIRECT CENSORSHIP 

In an act of unprecedented censorship of a journalistic publication, the 
US government pressured internet service providers to cease services 
to WikiLeaks.org. On December 1, 2010 Amazon removed WikiLeaks 
from its storage servers, and on December 2 the DNS service point- 
ing to the Wikileaks.org domain was disrupted. WikiLeaks was kept 
online during this period as the result of a "mass-mirroring" effort, 
whereby thousands of supporters of WikiLeaks copied the website, 
and hosted their own version, distributing the IP addresses through 
social networks. 20 

The Obama administration warned federal employees that mate- 
rials released by WikiLeaks remained classified — even though they 
were being published by some of the worlds leading news organiza- 
tions including the New York Times and the Guardian. Employees were 
told that accessing the material, whether on WikiLeaks.org or in the 
New York Times, would amount to a security violation. 21 Government 
agencies such as the Library of Congress, the Commerce Department 
and the US military blocked access to WikiLeaks materials over their 
networks. The ban was not limited to the public sector. Employees from 
the US government warned academic institutions that students hop- 
ing to pursue a career in public service should stay clear of material 
released by WikiLeaks in their research and in their online activity. 



15 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



FINANCIAL CENSORSHIP: THE BANKING BLOCKADE 

WikiLeaks is funded by donations from supporters. In December 
2010 major banking and financial institutions, including VISA, 
MasterCard, PayPal and Bank of America, bowed to unofficial US 
pressure and began to deny financial services to WikiLeaks. They 
blocked bank transfers and all donations made with major credit 
cards. While these are American institutions, their ubiquity in world 
finance meant that willing donors in both America and around the 
world were denied the option of sending money to WikiLeaks to 
support its publishing activities. 

The "banking blockade," as it has become known, is being con- 
ducted outside of any judicial or administrative procedure and remains 
in place at the date of publication. WikiLeaks has been pursuing major 
court cases in different jurisdictions across the world in order to break 
the blockade, with some preliminary victories, and the legal processes 
are ongoing. In the meantime WikiLeaks has been denied income, 
has elevated costs, and has been operating on reserve funds for nearly 
two years. 

The banking blockade is an assertion of the power to control 
financial transactions between third parties. It directly undermines 
the economic freedoms of individuals. Beyond even this, the exis- 
tential threat it poses to WikiLeaks exemplifies a new and troubling 
form of global economic censorship. 22 

Some people allegedly associated with WikiLeaks, along with 
supporters and WikiLeaks staff themselves, have had mysterious 
issues with their bank accounts — from account details to full bank 
account closure. 



16 



CYPHERPUNKS 



HARASSMENT OF JACOB APPELBAUM AND JEREMIE ZIMMERMANN 
On July 17, 2010 Julian Assange was slated to speak at the HOPE 
hacker conference in New York City. He canceled, and Jacob 
Appelbaum appeared in his stead. Since this appearance law 
enforcement agencies have been running a campaign of harass- 
ment against Appelbaum and people in his life. Appelbaum has 
been routinely detained, searched, denied access to legal coun- 
sel and interrogated at border crossings whenever he travels into 
and out of the United States. His equipment has been seized and 
his rights violated, during which he has been threatened with 
further violations of his rights. His detainment and harassment 
has involved dozens of US agencies, from the Department for 
Homeland Security Immigration and Customs Enforcement to 
the US Army. These detentions even include the refusal of access 
to toilets as a method of pressuring compliance. Through all this, 
Appelbaum has never been charged or told by the government 
why he is being harassed. 23 

In mid- June 2011, while preparing to board a plane at Wash- 
ington's Dulles Airport, Jeremie Zimmermann was stopped by 
two self-identified FBI agents. The agents questioned him about 
WikiLeaks and threatened him with arrest and imprisonment. 

Appelbaum and Zimmermann are among a long list of friends, 
supporters, or alleged associates of Julian Assange who have been 
subject to harassment and surveillance by US agencies, a list that 
includes lawyers and journalists engaged in the course of their pro- 
fessional duties. 



17 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



WARRANTLESS SEIZURE OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND THE "TWITTER 
SUBPOENA CASE" 

On December 14, 2010 Twitter received an "administrative subpoena" 
from the US Department of Justice ordering it to give up informa- 
tion that might be relevant to an investigation into WfkiLeaks. The 
subpoena was a so-called "2703(d) order," referring to a section of 
the Stored Communications Act. Under this law the US government 
claims the authority to compel the disclosure of private electronic 
communication records without the need for a judge to issue a search 
warrant — effectively getting around Fourth Amendment protections 
against arbitrary search and seizure. 

The subpoena sought user names, correspondence records, 
addresses, telephone numbers, bank account details, and credit 
card numbers from accounts and people allegedly associated with 
WikiLeaks, including Jacob Appelbaum, Icelandic parliamentarian 
Birgitta Jonsdottir, Dutch businessman and internet pioneer Rop 
Gonggrijp, and WikiLeaks itself. Under the terms of the subpoena 
Twitter was gagged from even telling them of the existence of the 
order. However, Twitter successfully appealed against the gag clause 
and won the right to inform the targets that their records were being 
requested. 

Having been told about the subpoena by Twitter, on January 
26, 2011 Appelbaum, Jonsdottir and Gonggrijp, represented by 
Keeker and Van Nest, the American Civil Liberties Union and the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation, had their attorneys jointly file a 
motion to vacate the order. This has become known as the "Twit- 
ter subpoena case." 24 A further motion was filed by Appelbaum's 
attorney requesting to unseal the still-secret court records of the 



18 



CYPHERPUNKS 



government's attempts to collect his private data from Twitter and 
any other companies. Both motions were denied by a US Magistrate 
Judge on March 11, 2011. The plaintiffs appealed. 

On October 9, 2011 the Wall Street Journal revealed that the 
Californian email provider Sonic.net had also received a subpoena 
demanding the data of Jacob Appelbaum. Sonic had fought the gov- 
ernment order and lost, but had obtained permission to disclose that 
it had been forced to turn over Appelbaum's information. The Wall 
Street Journal also reported that Google had been served a similar 
subpoena, but did not say whether Google had challenged it in court. 25 

On November 10, 2011 a federal judge decided against Appel- 
baum, Jonsdottir and Gonggrijp, ruling that Twitter must give their 
information to the Justice Department. 26 On January 20, 2012 the 
plaintiffs again appealed, seeking to challenge the refusal to unseal 
orders that might have been sent to companies other than Twitter." 27 
At the time of publication, the case is ongoing. 



19 



INCREASED COMMUNICATION VERSUS 
INCREASED SURVEILLANCE 



JULIAN: If we go back to this time in the early 1990s when you had the 
rise of the cypherpunk movement in response to state bans on cryp- 
tography a lot of people were looking at the power of the internet to 
provide free uncensored communications compared to mainstream 
media. But the cypherpunks always saw that, in fact, combined with 
this was also the power to surveil all the communications that were 
occurring. We now have increased communication versus increased 
surveillance. Increased communication means you have extra freedom 
relative to the people who are trying to control ideas and manufacture 
consent, and increased surveillance means just the opposite. 

The surveillance is far more evident now than it was when bulk 
surveillance was just being done by the Americans, the British, the 
Russians and some other governments like the Swiss and the French. 
Now it is being done by everyone, and by nearly every state, because 
of the commercialization of mass surveillance. And it's totalizing 
now, because people put all their political ideas, their family commu- 
nications, and their friendships on to the internet. So it's not just that 
there is increased surveillance of the communication that was already 
there; it's that there is so much more communication. And it's not just 
an increase in the volume of communication; it's an increase in the 



21 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



types of communication. All these new types of communication that 
would previously have been private are now being mass intercepted. 

There is a battle between the power of this information col- 
lected by insiders, these shadow states of information that are start- 
ing to develop, swapping with each other, developing connections 
with each other and with the private sector, versus the increased size 
of the commons with the internet as a common tool for humanity to 
speak to itself. 

I want to think about how we present our ideas. The big problem 
I've had, as someone who is steeped in state surveillance and under- 
standing how the transnational security industry has developed over 
the past twenty years, is that I'm too familiar with it and so I don't 
understand how to see this from a common perspective. But now our 
world is everyone's world, because everyone has thrown the inner 
core of their lives onto the internet. We have to somehow communi- 
cate what we know while we still can. 

ANDY: I suggest not looking at it from a citizen's point of view but 
from the point of view of people in power. The other day I was at 
this strange conference in Washington and I met these guys with a 
German embassy badge. I approached them and I said, "Oh, you're 
from the German embassy," and they said, "Ah, not exactly from the 
embassy, we are from near Munich." It turned out they were from 
the foreign intelligence and I asked them at the evening buffet, "So, 
what is the focus of secrecy?" They told me, "Well, it's about slowing 
down processes in order to better control them." That's the core of 
this kind of intelligence work, to slow down a process by taking 
away the ability of people to understand it. To declare things secret 



22 



CYPHERPUNKS 



means you limit the amount of people who have the knowledge and 
therefore the ability to affect the process. 

If you look at the internet from the perspective of people in 
power then the last twenty years have been frightening. They see the 
internet like an illness that affects their ability to define reality, to 
define what is going on, which is then used to define what the people 
know of what is going on and their ability to interact with it. If you 
look at, say, Saudi Arabia, where by some historical accident reli- 
gious leaders and the people owning the majority of the country are 
the same, their interest in change is in the zeros. Zero to minus five, 
maybe. They look at the internet like an illness and ask their con- 
sultants, "Do you have some medicine against this thing out there? 
We need to be immune if this affects our country, if this internet 
thingy comes." And the answer is mass surveillance. It is, "We need 
to control it totally, we need to filter, we need to know everything 
that they do." And that is what has happened in the last twenty years. 
There was massive investment in surveillance because people in 
power feared that the internet would affect their way of governance. 

J U LI AN : And yet despite this mass surveillance, mass communication 
has led to millions of people being able to come to a fast consensus. If 
you can go from a normal position to a new mass consensus position 
very quickly, then while the state might be able to see it developing, 
there's not enough time to formulate an effective response. 

Now that said, there was a Facebook-organized protest in 2008 
in Cairo. It did surprise the Mubarak government, and as a result 
these people were tracked down using Facebook. 28 In 2011, in a 
manual which was one of the most important documents used in 



23 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



the Egyptian revolution, the first page says "Do not use Twitter or 
Facebook" to distribute the manual, and the last page says "Do not 
use Twitter or Facebook" to distribute the manual. 29 Nonetheless, 
plenty of Egyptians did use Twitter and Facebook. But the reason 
they survived is because the revolution was successful. If it had not 
been successful, then those people would have been in a very, very 
grim position. And let's not forget that pretty early on President 
Mubarak cut off the internet in Egypt. It is actually questionable 
whether the internet blackout facilitated the revolution or harmed 
it. Some people think it facilitated it, because people had to go out 
on the street to get news about what was happening, and once you're 
out on the street you're out on the street. And people were directly 
affected because their cell phone and internet didn't work anymore. 

So if it is going to be successful, there needs to be a critical mass, 
it needs to happen fast, and it needs to win, because if it doesn't win 
then that same infrastructure that allows a fast consensus to develop 
will be used to track down and marginalize all the people who were 
involved in seeding the consensus. 

So that was Egypt, which, yes, was a US ally, but which is not a 
part of the English-speaking intelligence alliance of the US, the UK, 
Australia, New Zealand and Canada. Now instead let's try to imag- 
ine the Egyptian revolution kicking off in the United States — what 
would happen to Facebook and Twitter? They would be taken over 
by the state. And if the revolution was not successful they would be 
plumbed, as they are now, by the CIA and FBI for details on who 
were the critical participants. 



24 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JEREMIE: It's difficult to disassociate surveillance from control. We 
need to address both. That's more my interest — the control of the 
internet, whether it is by governments or corporations. 

JACOB: I think it's pretty clear that censorship is a by-product of 
surveillance generally speaking, whether it's self-censorship or 
actually technical censorship, and I think that an important way to 
convey this to regular people is to do it non-technically. For exam- 
ple, if we built roads the way that we build the internet, every road 
would have to have surveillance cameras and microphones that no 
one except the police could access, or someone who has successfully 
pretended to be the police. 

JULIAN: They're getting there, Jake, in the UK. 

JACOB: When you build a road it is not a requirement that every inch 
can be monitored with perfect surveillance that is only available to 
a secret group of people. Explaining to everyday people that that is 
the way we are building roads on the internet and then requiring 
people to use those roads — that is something that regular people can 
connect with when they realize that the original builders of the road 
will not always be the ones in control. 

ANDY: But some people don't even build roads. They put a garden 
out there and invite everybody to be naked. So now we're talking 
Facebook! It's a business case to make people comfortable with dis- 
closing their data. 



25 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: Right. People were compensated for being in the Stasi — the 
old East German state security — and they are compensated for par- 
ticipating in Facebook. It's just in Facebook they are compensated 
with social credits — to get laid by their neighbor — instead of being 
paid off directly. And it's important to just relate it to the human 
aspect, because it's not about technology, it's about control through 
surveillance. It's the perfect Panopticon in some ways. 30 

JULIAN: I'm quite interested in the philosophy of technique. Tech- 
nique means not just a piece of technology but it means, say, majority 
consensus on a board, or the structure of a parliament — it's system- 
atized interaction. For example, it seems to me that feudal systems 
came from the technique of mills. Once you had centralized mills, 
which required huge investments and which were easily subject to 
physical control, then it was quite natural that you would end up 
with feudal relations as a result. As time has gone by we seem to have 
developed increasingly sophisticated techniques. Some of these tech- 
niques can be democratized; they can be spread to everyone. But the 
majority of them — because of their complexity — are techniques that 
form as a result of strongly interconnected organizations like Intel 
Corporation. Perhaps the underlying tendency of technique is to go 
through these periods of discovering technique, centralizing tech- 
nique, democratizing technique — when the knowledge about how to 
do it floods out in the next generation that is educated. But I think 
that the general tendency for technique is to centralize control in 
those people who control the physical resources of techniques. 

Something like a semi-conductor manufacturer is, I think, the 
ultimate example of that, where you need such order that the air 



26 



CYPHERPUNKS 



itself must be pure, where you need a construction plant that has 
thousands of people in it who have to wear hairnets to keep every 
little skin flake, every bit of hair away from the semi-conductor 
manufacturing process, which is a multi-step process that is 
extremely complicated. And there are literally millions of hours of 
research knowledge possessed by the semi-conductor manufactur- 
ing organization. If those things are popular, which they are, and 
they underpin the internet, then coded within internet liberation is 
semi-conductor manufacturing. And coded within semi-conductor 
manufacturing is the ability for whoever has physical control of the 
semi-conductor manufacturer to extract enormous concessions. 

So underpinning the high-tech communications revolution — and 
the liberty that we have extracted from that — is the whole neoliberal, 
transnational, globalized modern market economy. It is in fact the peak 
of that. It is the height, in terms of technological achievement, that the 
modern globalized neoliberal economy can produce. The internet is 
underpinned by extremely complex trade interactions between optical 
fiber manufacturers, semi-conductor manufacturers, mining compa- 
nies that dig all this stuff up, and all the financial lubricants to make the 
trade happen, courts to enforce private property laws and so on. So it 
really is the top of the pyramid of the whole neoliberal system. 

ANDY: On the point about technique, when Johannes Gutenberg 
invented the printing press, it was actually forbidden occasionally 
in parts of Germany and that's the way it spread all over the country, 
because when it was forbidden in one area they moved to another 
jurisdiction. 31 I didn't study it in all the details but what I know is 
that they messed up with the Catholic Church because they were 



27 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



breaking the monopoly on printing books, and once they got into 
legal trouble they moved on to a place where it was not forbidden. In 
a way this helped to spread it. 

The internet was, I think, slightly different because on the one 
hand you have machines that can be used as a production facility, 
which even the Commodore 64 was, in a way, as most people used it 
for other purposes. 

JULIAN: So, each little machine that you had you could run your own 
software. 

ANDY: Yes. And you could also use it to distribute ideas. But on the 
other hand, philosophically, as John Gilmore — one of the founders 
of the US based Electronic Frontier Foundation — said at the begin- 
ning of the 1990s when the internet attained global reach, "The Net 
interprets censorship as damage and routes around it." 32 As we know 
today, that was a mixture of technical interpretation combined with 
an optimistic impact view, a kind of wishful thinking and also a kind 
of self-fulfilling prophecy. 

JULIAN: But it was true for Usenet, which is a many-to-many e-mail 
system, if you like, that started about thirty years ago. To explain 
Usenet simply, imagine there is no difference between people and 
servers and every person is running their own Usenet server. You 
write something, and you give it to one or two people. They (auto- 
matically) check to see if they already have it. If they don't already 
have it they take it and give it to everyone they are connected to. 
And so on. And as a result the message floods through everyone 



28 



CYPHERPUNKS 



and everyone eventually gets a copy. If any person is engaged in cen- 
sorship then they are just ignored, it doesn't make any difference. 
The message still spreads through all the people who are not censors. 
Gilmore was speaking about Usenet, he was not speaking about the 
internet. He was also not speaking about web pages. 

AN DY: While this is technically correct, the interpretation of his words 
and their long-term impact was to generate people who understood 
themselves as the internet. People said, "Ok, there's censorship, we'll 
route around it," where the politician with no technical understand- 
ing thought, "Oh shit, there's a new technology that limits our control 
of the information sphere." So I think Gilmore, who was one of the 
fore-thinkers of cypherpunk, did a great job of leading things in this 
direction, which inspired the whole crypto-anarchistic way of having 
your own form of anonymous communication without fearing that 
you will be followed up. 

JEREMIE: I see a difference with what we describe as the spreading of 
technology, because in the case of the mill and the printing press you 
had to look at one to understand how it works, whereas now we are 
increasingly building control inside the technology. The control is 
built-in. If you look at a modern computer in most cases you cannot 
even open it to get to know all the components. And all the com- 
ponents are in small cases — you cannot know what they are doing. 

ANDY: Because of the complexity? 



29 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JEREMIE: Because of the complexity and also because the technology 
itself is not intended to be understood. That's the case with proprietary 
technology. 33 Cory Doctorow describes it in his "The War on General- 
Purpose Computing." 34 Where a computer is a generic machine, you 
can do everything with it. You can process any information as an input; 
transform it into anything as an output. And more and more we're 
building devices that are those general-purpose computers but which 
are restricted to do just GPS or just telephone or just MP3 player. More 
and more we are building machines that have built-in control, to for- 
bid the user from doing certain things. 

JULIAN: That's built-in control to prevent people understanding it 
and modifying it from the purpose that the manufacturer wanted it 
for, but we have worse than this now, because it is actually connected 
up to the network. 

J E REM IE: Yes, so it can contain the function to monitor the user and 
its data. This is why free software is so important for a free society. 

ANDY: I totally agree that we need the general-purpose machine, 
but this morning when I was trying to fly here from Berlin the plane 
actually aborted starting — it's the first time this has happened to 
me. The plane drove to the side and the Captain said, "Ladies and 
gentlemen, we had a failure in the electrical systems so we decided 
to stop and restart the systems." I was actually thinking, "Oh shit, 
sounds like Windows reboot, Control Alt Delete — maybe it works!" 
So actually, I would not be totally unhappy to have a single-purpose 
machine on a plane which just does that and does that very well. If 



30 



CYPHERPUNKS 



I'm sitting in a flying machine I don't want the pilots to be distracted 
by playing Tetris or having Stuxnet or whatever. 35 

j£r£M!E: The plane by itself doesn't process your personal data, it 
doesn't have control over your life. 

ANDY: Well, a flying machine does have control over my life for a 
time. 

JACOB: Cory's argument is also, I think, best described by saying 
that there are no more cars, there are no more airplanes, there are no 
more hearing aids; there are computers with four wheels, computers 
with wings, and computers that help you to hear. And part of this is 
not whether or not they are single-purpose computers; it's whether 
or not we can verify that they do the thing that they say that they do, 
and whether or not we understand how well they do it. Often people 
try to argue that they have the right to lock that up and to keep it 
a secret, and they make computers either complex or they make it 
legally difficult to understand them. That is actually dangerous for 
society because we know that people don't always act in everyone's 
best interests, and we also know that people make mistakes — not 
maliciously — and so locking these things up is very dangerous on 
a number of levels, not the least of which is that we are all imper- 
fect. That's just a fact. The ability to have access to the blueprints 
of the systems underlying our lives is part of why free software is 
important, but it's also why free hardware is important. It improves 
our ability to freely make sustainable investments, to improve the 
systems we use and to determine if these systems work as expected. 



31 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



But regardless of freedom, it's also why it is important to under- 
stand these systems, because when we don't understand them there's 
a general trend to defer to authority, to people who do understand 
them or are able to assert control over them, even if they do not 
understand the essence of the thing itself. Which is why we see so 
much hype about cyber war — it's because some people that seem to 
be in the authority about war start talking about technology as if they 
understand it. Such people are often talking about cyber war and not 
one of them, not a single one, is talking about cyber peace-building, 
or anything related to peace-building. They are always talking about 
war because that's their business and they are trying to control tech- 
nological and legal processes as a means for promoting their own 
interests. So when we have no control over our technology such peo- 
ple wish to use it for their ends, for war specifically. That's a recipe 
for some pretty scary stuff — which is how I think we ended up with 
Stuxnet — and otherwise reasonable people suggest, while the US 
wages war, that such tactics will somehow prevent wars. That's per- 
haps a reasonable argument for a country that isn't actively invading 
other nations, but hardly credible in the context of a nation involved 
in multiple ongoing concurrent invasions. 



32 



THE MILITARIZATION OF CYBERSPACE 



JULIAN: I see that there is now a militarization of cyberspace, in the 
sense of a military occupation. When you communicate over the 
internet, when you communicate using mobile phones, which are 
now meshed to the internet, your communications are being inter- 
cepted by military intelligence organizations. It's like having a tank 
in your bedroom. It's a soldier between you and your wife as you're 
SMSing. We are all living under martial law as far as our communi- 
cations are concerned, we just can't see the tanks — but they are there. 
To that degree, the internet, which was supposed to be a civilian 
space, has become a militarized space. But the internet is our space, 
because we all use it to communicate with each other and with the 
members of our family. The communications at the inner core of our 
private lives now move over the internet. So in fact our private lives 
have entered into a militarized zone. It is like having a soldier under 
the bed. This is a militarization of civilian life. 

JACOB: Right before I came here I was asked to be a coach for the 
Pacific Rim Collegiate Cyber Defense competition for the team of 
University of Washington Security and Privacy Research Labora- 
tory. At the very last minute I was asked to be an advisor. We con- 



33 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



tributed quite a lot of time to compete in a cyber war event where 
SPAWAR, a civilian arm of the US Navy that includes pentesting 
services, who do offensive computer hacking as well as defensive 
computer hacking, played what is generally called the Red Team. 36 
What they do is they attack everybody else that's playing and every 
team's job is to defend their computer systems, which have been 
given to them at the beginning of the event with no real foreknowl- 
edge at all. You don't know what kind of systems you'll defend and 
it's not even clear how the points are scored in the beginning so you 
just try to do your best and hope. 

JULIAN: Are you sure that it's actually a game? Maybe it's not a game! 

JACOB: No, you just get a bunch of computers and you have to pro- 
tect them, and they break in and they take over the systems. It's like 
a kids' version of Capture the Flag at a real hacker conference or 
something like that, and it's interesting because these guys have a lot 
of tools, they've written software. 37 

JULIAN: What's the point of it though — from the US Navy's perspec- 
tive? 

JACOB: Well, in their case they are just sponsoring this because they 
want to build tomorrow's cyber warriors today and so, for example, 
I brought you a notepad from the CIA because they were recruiting. 
There was a guy there named Charlie — Charlie from the CIA — and 
he was explaining that if you want to come and join the CIA this 
is a great opportunity to work in the real world. And the SPAWAR 



34 



CYPHERPUNKS 



people were there, and Microsoft was there recruiting. The idea was 
to train all of these people, all of these teams, to go on to the National 
Championship and to be winners and to "defend the nation," and 
then also to be able to go on to do offensive hacking as cyber warriors, 
not just cyber defenders. We scored something like 4,000 points in 
this game, which was the combined score of the second place, third 
place and fourth place teams. We were actually still higher than all 
of them combined. 

JULIAN: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 

JACOB: It wasn't thanks to me — my motivational quote was like, "Hey, 
it's always darkest straight before it goes pitch black," and I don't think 
I'm particularly good at coaching — these guys are really good. But it 
was interesting because the way that the whole thing was framed was 
in terms of war, so they would say, "Hey, we want to hear your war 
whoop." It's like, "I'm sorry, what?" That's what they were saying over 
lunch, for example, when we were taking a break from defending our 
systems. They framed everything in terms of attacking systems and 
war and cyber war and the greatness of this way of thinking. And 
interestingly enough, aside from the team that I was working with, 
I felt like there were a lot of people that were struggling, because they 
weren't teaching them to use the Art of War — it was more like the 
Sysadmin Cup, people who defend systems — and it just felt disgust- 
ing. 38 It felt really weird because there were all these people whose 
background is in war, and they come from the war perspective, but 
they're not teaching strategy, they're very focused on the rhetoric of 
defending these systems, or on attacking these systems, and they just 



35 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



had so much war in the way that they were really trying to rile people 
up into a sort of patriotic fervor. They weren't promoting creative 
thinking or some kind of framework for independent analysis; they 
were pushing a cog-in-the-machine-mentality of someone who fol- 
lows orders for the good of the nation. I had never experienced it 
before. I felt sick and most of my team had a hard time stomaching it 
or even taking it seriously. 

JULIAN: Do you think that that's standard US Navy training, and 
they're just now trying to apply it to another domain? Is it a top-down 
US cyber command decision — an international strategic decision — 
by the United States? 

ANDY: More like the Nazis who had those youth camps where the 
kids were trained. 

JACOB: Sie konnen das sagen weil du bist Deutsche. You can say that 
because you're German. No, it's not like that. The US Navy's involve- 
ment is just because the US government is sponsoring all this stuff. 
They asked me to coach because they needed someone there to do 
this coaching and I just agreed because I liked the guys involved, 
these undergrads. But really what it comes down to is that the US 
government is really trying to push getting people into this and 
they're trying to push from the perspective of nationalism. It's a very, 
very strange event to be at because, on the one hand, it's good to be 
able to know how to keep your system safe and it's good to under- 
stand the infrastructure that all of our lives rely on; but on the other 
hand, they weren't trying to convince people to understand it, they 



36 



CYPHERPUNKS 



were trying to whip them up into a sort of fervor in order to make 
them happy to do this type of work. 

ANDY: Unfortunately, the interest of the United States to keep sys- 
tems secure is totally limited because they want systems to be vul- 
nerable in order to take over control. The approach to controlling 
encryption worldwide has not been going as far as the United States 
originally pushed for around 1998, when the US undersecretary of 
commerce for international trade David Aarons went on a world tour 
arguing for government access to everyone's encryption passwords. 39 
But encryption is still handled as a so called dual-use technology and 
its export in the form of end-user-products to many countries is lim- 
ited by law, agreed to worldwide in the so called Wassenaar Arrange- 
ment. 40 This might sound reasonable in the context of declaring 
countries and their actions as "evil," but it shows the dimension of 
the double-standard, as telecommunication surveillance technology 
is so far not limited by export-controls. 41 

JULIAN: Andy, for years you've designed cryptographic telephones. 
What sort of mass surveillance is occurring in relation to telecommu- 
nications? Tell me what is the state of the art as far as the government 
intelligence/bulk-surveillance industry is concerned? 

AN DY: Mass storage — meaning storing all telecommunication, all voice 
calls, all traffic data, anyway groups consume the Short Message Service 
(SMS), but also internet connections, in some situations at least limited 
to email. If you compare the military budget to the cost of surveillance 
and the cost of cyber warriors, normal weapon systems cost a lot of 



37 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



money. Cyber warriors or mass surveillance are super-cheap compared 
to just one aircraft. One military aircraft costs you between. . . 

JULIAN: Around a hundred million. 

ANDY: And storage gets cheaper every year. Actually, we made some 
calculations in the Chaos Computer Club: you get decent voice-quality 
storage of all German telephone calls in a year for about 30 million 
euros including administrative overheads, so the pure storage is about 
8 million euros. 42 

JULIAN: And there are even companies like VASTech in South Africa 
that are selling these systems for $10 million per year. 43 "We'll inter- 
cept all your calls, we'll store all your intercepted calls en masse." But 
there has been a shift in the last few years from intercepting everything 
going across from one country to another and picking out the partic- 
ular people you want to spy on and assigning them to human beings, 
to now intercepting everything and storing everything permanently. 

ANDY: To explain it roughly historically, in the old days someone was 
a target because of his diplomatic position, because of the company 
he worked for, because he was suspected of doing something or he 
was in contact with people who actually did something, and then you 
applied surveillance measures on him. These days it's deemed much 
more efficient to say, "We'll take everything and we can sort it out 
later." So they do have long-term storage, and the main way of describ- 
ing the industry's two chapters is the "tactical" approach and the 
"strategic" approach. Tactical means, "Right now, in this meeting, we 



38 



CYPHERPUNKS 



need to bug the place, we need to get someone in with a microphone, 
an array jacket, or have GSM (Global System for Mobile commu- 
nications) surveillance systems, in a car, deployed, able to intercept 
what people are saying right away without needing to interfere with 
the network operator, get a police search warrant or anything like 
that, no legal procedure required, just do it." The strategic approach 
is to do it by default, just record everything, and sort it out later using 
analytic systems. 

JULIAN: So, strategic interception is take everything that a telecom- 
munication satellite is relaying, take everything across a fiber optic 
cable. 

ANDY: Because you never know when someone is a suspect. 

JACOB: There's a thing called the NSA AT&T case in the United 
States — the second case: Hepting v. AT&T. In Folsom, California, 
Mark Klein, a former technician for the giant telecommunications 
company AT&T, exposed that the NSA, the US National Security 
Agency, was capturing all of the data that they could get AT&T to give 
them. They just took it all wholesale — data as well as voice calls — so 
every time I picked up the phone or connected to the internet in 
San Francisco during the time period that Mark Klein has exposed, 
we know that the NSA on US soil against US citizens was getting it 
all. 44 I'm pretty sure they have used that intercept data in the inves- 
tigations that they've been doing against people in the United States, 
which raises all kinds of interesting constitutional issues because 
they get to keep it forever. 



39 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



JEREMIE: We also have this example of Eagle, the system sold by the 
French company Amesys that was sold to Gaddafi's Libya, and on 
the commercial document it was written, "Nationwide interception 
mechanism." It's a big box that you put somewhere and you just lis- 
ten to all your people's communications. 45 

JULIAN: Ten years ago this was seen to be a fantasy, this was seen to 
be something only paranoid people believed in, but the costs of mass 
interception have now decreased to the point where even a country 
like Libya with relatively few resources was doing it with French tech- 
nology. In fact most countries are already there in terms of the actual 
interception. It's the efficiency of understanding and responding to 
what's being intercepted and stored that's going to be the next big leap. 
Now in many countries we have strategic interception of all traffic 
in and out of the country, but engaging in subsequent actions, like 
automatically blocking bank accounts, or deploying police, or mar- 
ginalizing particular groups, or emancipating others, is still something 
we are on the cusp of. Siemens is selling a platform for intelligence 
agencies that does actually produce automated actions. So when target 
A is within a certain number of meters of target B according to their 
mobile intercept records, and target A receives an email mentioning 
something — a keyword — then an action is triggered. It's on the way. 



40 



FIGHTING TOTAL SURVEILLANCE WITH THE 
LAWS OF MAN 



J E RE M I E : So now it's a fact that technology enables total surveillance 
of every communication. Then there is the other side of that coin, 
which is what we do with it. We could admit that for what you call 
tactical surveillance there are some legitimate uses — investigators 
investigating bad guys and networks of bad guys and so on may 
need, under the supervision of the judicial authority, to be able to 
use such tools — but the question is where to draw the line for this 
judicial supervision, where to draw the line for the control that the 
citizens can have over the use of those technologies. This is a policy 
issue. When we get to those policy issues you have politicians that 
are asked to just sign something and don't understand the under- 
lying technology, and I think that we as citizens have a role, not 
only to explain how the technology functions at large, including to 
politicians, but also to wade in to the political debates that surround 
the use of those technologies. I know that in Germany there was 
a massive movement against generalized data retention that led to 
the overturn of the Data Retention law in front of the constitutional 
court. 46 There is a debate going on in the EU about revising the Data 
Retention Directive. 47 



41 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



ANDY: You are describing the theory of the democratic state which, 
of course, does need to filter out some bad guys here and there and 
listen to their phone calls on the basis of a court decision with over- 
view to make sure it is done in the proper way. The trouble with that 
is that the authorities need to act in compliance with the law. If they 
don't do that then what are they good for? Especially with this strate- 
gic approach, democratic states within Europe are massively buying 
machines that allow them to act exactly outside the law in regard to 
interception because they don't need a court decision, they can just 
switch it on and do it, and this technology can't be controlled. 

JULIAN: But are there two approaches to dealing with mass state 
surveillance: the laws of physics; and the laws of man? One is to use 
the laws of physics by actually building devices that prevent inter- 
ception. The other is to enact democratic controls through the law 
to make sure people must have warrants and so on and to try to gain 
some regulatory accountability. But strategic interception cannot be 
a part of that, cannot be meaningfully constrained by regulation. 
Strategic interception is about intercepting everyone regardless of 
whether they are innocent or guilty. We must remember that it is 
the core of the Establishment carrying such surveillance. There will 
always be a lack of political will to expose state spying. And the tech- 
nology is inherently so complex, and its use in practice so secret that 
there cannot be meaningful democratic oversight. 

ANDY: Or you spy on your own parliament. 



42 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JULIAN: But those are excuses — the mafia and foreign intelligence — 
they are excuses that people will accept to erect such a system. 

JACOB: The Four Horsemen of the Info-pocalypse: child pornog- 
raphy, terrorism, money laundering, and The War on Some Drugs. 

J U LI AN : Once you have erected this surveillance, given that it is com- 
plex, given that it is designed to operate in secret, isn't it true that it 
cannot be regulated with policy? I think that except for very small 
nations like Iceland, unless there are revolutionary conditions it is 
simply not possible to control mass interception with legislation and 
policy. It is just not going to happen. It is too cheap and too easy to get 
around political accountability and to actually perform interception. 
The Swedes got through an interception bill in 2008, known as the 
FRA-lagen, which meant the Swedish signals intelligence agency the 
FRA could legally intercept all communication travelling through 
the country in bulk, and ship it off to the United States, with some 
caveats. 48 Now how can you enforce those caveats once you've set up 
the interception system and the organization doing it is a secret spy 
agency? It's impossible. And in fact cases have come out showing 
that the FRA had on a variety of occasions broken the law previously. 
Many countries simply do it off-law with no legislative cover at all. 
So we're sort of lucky if, like in the Swedish example, they decided 
that for their own protection from prosecution they want to go legal 
by changing the law. And that's the case for most countries — there is 
bulk interception occurring, and when there is a legislative proposal 
it is to protect the ass of those who are doing it. 



43 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



This technology is very complex; for example in the debate in 
Australia and the UK about proposed legislation to intercept all 
metadata, most people do not understand the value of metadata or 
even the word itself. 49 Intercepting all metadata means you have to 
build a system that physically intercepts all data and then throws 
everything but the metadata away. But such a system cannot be 
trusted. There's no way to determine whether it is in fact intercept- 
ing and storing all data without having highly skilled engineers with 
authorization to go in and check out precisely what is going on, and 
there's no political will to grant access. The problem is getting worse 
because complexity and secrecy are a toxic mix. Hidden by complex- 
ity. Hidden by secrecy. Unaccountability is built-in. It is a feature. 
It is dangerous by design. 

j£r£M!E: I'm not saying that the policy approach can work. I'm saying 
that this is the theory of how a democratic system would function, and 
indeed, even within this theory you have the secret services that are 
allowed to go beyond what is the rule for standard police forces and 
investigators. So even if we frame the behavior of the standard investi- 
gators properly, there would be other people who would be able to use 
those technologies. But there is a real question of whether or not we 
should regulate the fact of just buying and owning those technologies 
as opposed to regulating the use of them. 

JULIAN: This is the bulk interception kits that can intercept half a 
country or a city 



44 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JEREMIE: Yes. Like a nuclear weapon: you cannot sell a nuclear 
weapon easily, and some countries may want to build one but have 
problems. When we talk about weapons systems it's the technology 
that is regulated and not the use that is made of it. I think the debate 
might be about whether or not these technologies should be consid- 
ered as war. 

JACOB: It depends. When it is weapons — and there is no question that 
surveillance equipment is a weapon in places like Syria or Libya — they 
specifically use it to target people politically. The French company, 
Amesys, targeted people in the United Kingdom using French equip- 
ment that would be illegal to run in France, and they sold it knowingly. 50 

ANDY: And they'd never do that, right? 

JACOB: Well, Amesys were caught with their own internal docu- 
ments in The Spy Files. 51 If we're going to talk about it in terms of 
weapons, we have to remember it is not like selling a country a truck. 
It's like selling a country a truck, a mechanic and a team that goes in 
the truck that selectively targets people and then shoots them. 

JULIAN: It's like selling it a whole army of trucks. 

ANDY: It's interesting that cryptography is regulated. There's the 
Wassenaar Arrangement, which applies internationally, meaning 
you cannot export encryption technology, which helps to protect 
against surveillance technology, to those countries declared evil or, 
for whatever reason, problematic. But if you are dealing surveillance 



45 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



equipment you can sell that internationally. There are no export 
restrictions on that. The reason, I would say, is simply because even 
the democratically-run governments have a self-interest, which 
is to control. And even if you're dealing with evil countries and 
you bring them surveillance equipment to do evil things you will 
benefit, because you will learn what they are listening to, what are 
they afraid of, who are the most important people in the country 
opposing the government, organizing political events and so on. 
So you will be able to predict future happenings, to sponsor actions 
and so on. Here we are in the very dirty game of what is happening 
between countries, and that's the reality of why surveillance systems 
are not regulated. 

JULIAN: I want to explore this analogy of mass surveillance being a 
weapon of mass destruction. It was a fact of physics that it was pos- 
sible to make an atomic bomb, and when an atomic bomb was made 
then geo-politics changed, and life for many people changed — in 
different ways, some positive perhaps, and others on the brink of total 
apocalypse. A regulatory movement applied controls and so far those 
controls have, with the exception of Japan, saved us from nuclear war. 
But it's easy to tell when such weapons are used and when they are not. 

With the increase in the sophistication and the reduction of the 
cost of bulk surveillance that has happened over the past ten years, 
we're now at a stage where the human population is doubling every 
twenty-five years or so — but the capacity of surveillance is doubling 
every eighteen months. The surveillance curve is dominating the 
population curve. There is no direct escape. We're now at the stage 
where just $10 million can buy you a unit to permanently store the 



46 



CYPHERPUNKS 



mass intercepts of a medium sized country. So I wonder if we need 
an equivalent response. This really is a big threat to democracy and 
to freedom all around the world that needs a response, like the threat 
of atomic war needed a mass response, to try and control it, while 
we still can. 

ANDY: I was seeing in Libya how the democratic movement ran into 
the surveillance stations, they took records, they provided evidence 
that Western companies supported the Gaddafi regime in suppress- 
ing political actions, and then the new government took over exactly 
these facilities which are now operating in full service again. 52 So while 
I do agree that it would be a good idea to control this technology, 
I am a bit skeptical about the interests of citizens against the interests 
of people in power. I wouldn't even call it governments necessarily, 
because whoever has the ability to listen to all the phone calls has the 
ability to do things. This is about stock rates also — economically, you 
can benefit a lot if you know what's going on. 

JULIAN: Where countries have legislation as to what the targets of 
their major electronic spy agencies are supposed to be — agencies 
like the NSA in the United States, GCHQ (Government Commu- 
nications Headquarters) in the United Kingdom, the DSD (Defense 
Signals Directorate) in Australia — they have changed that legislation 
to include economic intelligence. For example, say Australia and the 
US are vying for a wheat deal, they snoop on all the people who are 
involved in the deal. This has been around for a long time now, at 
least ten years in public — but it is granted because people are doing 
it anyway. It started with arms deals, where you have companies like 



47 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, and Northrup doing arms deals, and also 
being involved in building mass interception systems because these 
groups are close at a patronage level. They got favors from their friends 
and covered arms deal intercepts under national security criteria. But 
now it applies to anything that could economically benefit a country, 
which is almost everything. 

JACOB: A good analogy that some people in the Chaos Commu- 
nication Congress brought up in December 2011 was the concept 
of treating surveillance technology, especially tactical surveillance 
technology but also strategic surveillance technology, like land- 
mines. 53 I think that's a very powerful thing. Just because it's possible 
doesn't mean that it's inevitable that we will go down this path, and 
it doesn't mean that we have to get all the way to the point of every 
person being monitored. 

There are some economic incentives that are against us though. 
For example, someone explained to me that the way that the 
Norwegian telephone system used to work is such that it would 
essentially run a meter which, depending on how far away your call, 
would run faster or slower. But it was not legal for the Norwegian 
telephone company to store or to keep a ledger of the actual meta- 
data about the call you made, such as the number you dialed, spe- 
cifically because of privacy concerns surrounding the Second World 
War. So it is possible to build that same technology in a way that is 
privacy-friendly but still allows for a market-based approach, which 
still allows for economic contributions. However we cannot win, for 
example, with GSM (mobile) technologies. At the moment the way 
that these systems are set up, not just in terms of billing but in terms 



48 



CYPHERPUNKS 



of the architecture, means they have no location privacy, they have 
no content privacy. 

JULIAN: A mobile phone is a tracking device that also makes calls. 

JACOB: Exactly. For example, if we're talking about everybody in the 
Third World being spied on, realistically what does that mean? It 
means their telephone systems, which are their link to the rest of 
the world, are spy devices when someone chooses to use the data 
collected in that way. 

ANDY: I saw African countries are getting a whole internet infra- 
structure, including fiber optic cable and backbone switches, as a gift 
from the Chinese. 

JACOB: As a ZTE gift or something like that? 54 

ANDY: Yes, and of course the Chinese have an interest in the data, 
so they don't need to be paid back in money, they take it in data, the 
new currency. 



49 



PRIVATE SECTOR SPYING 



JEREMIE: State-sponsored surveillance is indeed a major issue which 
challenges the very structure of all democracies and the way they 
function, but there is also private surveillance and potentially pri- 
vate mass collection of data. Just look at Google. If you're a standard 
Google user Google knows who you're communicating with, who 
you know, what you're researching, potentially your sexual orienta- 
tion, and your religious and philosophical beliefs. 

ANDY: It knows more about you than you know yourself. 

JEREMIE: More than your mother and maybe more than yourself. 
Google knows when you're online and when you're not. 

ANDY: Do you know what you looked for two years, three days and 
four hours ago? You don't know; Google knows. 

JEREMIE: Actually, I try not to use Google anymore for these very 
reasons. 



51 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: It's like the KOI Your Television of the 21st century. 55 Effective 
protest except the network effect prevents your protest from working. 56 
KOI your television, man. 

J E REM IE: Well it's not a protest, it is more my personal way of seeing 
things. 

ANDY: I watched these beautiful movies of people throwing their 
televisions out of three-storey houses. 

JEREMIE: It's not only the state-sponsored surveillance, it's the 
question of privacy, the way data is being handled by third parties 
and the knowledge that people have of what is being done with the 
data. I don't use Facebook so I don't know much about it. But now 
with Facebook you see the behavior of users who are very happy 
to hand out any kind of personal data, and can you blame people 
for not knowing where the limit is between privacy and publicity? 
A few years ago, before digital technologies, people who had a public 
life were either in show-business, politics or journalism, and now 
everybody has the potential for public life by clicking a publish but- 
ton. "Publish" means make something public, it means handing out 
access to this data to the rest of the world — and, of course, when 
you see teenagers sending pictures of themselves drunk or whatever, 
they may not have this vision that it means the whole of the rest of 
the world, potentially for a very, very long period of time. Facebook 
makes its business by blurring this line between privacy, friends, and 
publicity. And it is even storing the data when you think that it is 
only meant for your friends and the people you love. So whatever the 



52 



CYPHERPUNKS 



degree of publicity that you intend your data to be under, when you 
click publish on Facebook you give it to Facebook first, and then they 
give access to some other Facebook users after. 

JULIAN: Even this line between government and corporation is 
blurred. If you look at the expansion in the military contractor sector 
in the West over the past ten years, the NSA, which was the biggest 
spy agency in the world, had ten primary contractors on its books 
that it worked with. Two years ago it had over 1,000. So there is a 
smearing out of the border between what is government and what is 
the private sector. 

JEREMIE: And it can be argued that the US spying agencies have 
access to all of Google's stored data. 

JULIAN: But they do. 

JEREMIE: And all of Facebook's data, so in a way Facebook and 
Google may be extensions of these agencies. 

JULIAN: Do you have a Google subpoena Jake? Was a subpoena sent 
to Google to hand over information related to your Google account? 
WikiLeaks got subpoenas to our California domain name registrar 
dynadot, which is where the wikileaks.org registration is made. They 
were subpoenas from the secret ongoing Grand Jury investigation 
into WikiLeaks, asking for financial records, login records, et cetera, 
which it gave them. 57 



53 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: The Wall Street Journal reported that Twitter and Google 
and Sonic.net, three services that I use or have used in the past, 
each received a 2703(d) notice, which is this unusual form of secret 
subpoena. 58 

JULIAN: Under the PATRIOT Act? 

JACOB: No. This is the Stored Communications Act, essentially. The 
Wall Street Journal is saying that each of these services claims that the 
government wanted the metadata, and the government asserted it has 
the right to do this without a warrant. There's an ongoing legal case 
about the government's right to keep its tactics secret, not only from 
the public, but from court records. I read the Wall Street Journal and 
found out like everyone else. 

JULIAN: So Google sucked up to the US government in its Grand Jury 
investigation into WikiLeaks when the government subpoenaed your 
records — not a conventional subpoena, but this special sort of intel- 
ligence subpoena. But the news came out earlier in 201 1 that Twitter 
had been served a number of subpoenas, from the same Grand Jury, 
but Twitter fought to be able to notify the people whose accounts 
were subpoenaed — for the gag order to be lifted. I don't have a Twit- 
ter account, so I didn't get one, but my name and Bradley Manning's 
name were on all the subpoenas as the information that was being 
searched for. Jake, you had a Twitter account so Twitter received a 
subpoena in relation to you. Google also received a subpoena, but 
didn't fight to make it public. 59 



54 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: Allegedly. That's what I read in the Wall Street Journal. 
I might not be even allowed to reference it except for in connection 
to the Wall Street Journal. 

JULIAN: Is it because these orders also have a gag component? That 
has been found to be unconstitutional, hasn't it? 

JACOB: Maybe not. For the Twitter case it is public that we lost the 
motion for a stay where we said that disclosing this data to the gov- 
ernment would do irreparable harm as they can never forget this data 
once they receive it. They said, "Yeah well, your stay is denied, Twitter 
must disclose this data." We're in the process of appeal, specifically 
about the secrecy of docketing — and I can't talk about that — but as 
it stands right now, the court said that on the internet you have no 
expectation of privacy when you willingly reveal information to a 
third party, and, by the way, everyone on the internet is a third party. 

JULIAN: Even if the organization like Facebook or Twitter says that it 
will keep the information private. 

JACOB: For sure. And this is the blurring of the state and corporation. 
This is actually probably the most important thing to consider here, 
that the NSA and Google have a partnership in cyber- security for US 
national defense reasons. 

ANDY: Whatever cyber-security means in this context. That's a wide 
term. 



55 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: They are trying to exempt everything from the Freedom of 
Information Act and to keep it secret. Then the US government also 
asserts it has the right to send an administrative subpoena, which has 
a lower bar than a search warrant, where the third party is gagged 
from telling you about it, and you have no right to fight because it is 
the third party that is directly involved, and the third party has no 
constitutional grounds to protect your data either. 

JULIAN: The third party being Twitter or Facebook or your ISP. 

JACOB: Or anyone. They said it was a one-to-one map with bank- 
ing privacy and with dialing a telephone. You willingly disclose the 
number to the phone company by using it. You knew that, right? By 
using the telephone you obviously are saying, "I have no expectation 
of privacy," when typing those numbers. There is even less explicit 
connection to the machine. People don't understand how the internet 
works — they don't understand telephone networks either — but courts 
have consistently ruled that this is the case, and in our Twitter case so 
far, which unfortunately I can't really talk about because I don't actu- 
ally live in a free country, they assert essentially the same thing. 60 

It's absolute madness to imagine that we give up all of our 
personal data to these companies, and then the companies have 
essentially become privatized secret police. And — in the case of 
Facebook — we even have democratized surveillance. Instead of 
paying people off the way the Stasi did in East Germany, we reward 
them as a culture — they get laid now. They report on their friends 
and then, "Hey, so and so got engaged;" "Oh, so and so broke up;" 
"Oh, I know who to call now." 



56 



CYPHERPUNKS 



ANDY: There were people who were able to pressure Facebook to 
hand out all the data stored about them under European Data Pro- 
tection law, and the smallest amount of data was 350 MB, the big- 
gest one was around 800 MB. 61 The interesting thing is the database 
structure of Facebook has been disclosed with this act. Every time 
you log in the IP number and everything gets stored, every click 
you make, every time, also the amount of times you stay on a page 
so they can assume you like it, you don't like it and so on. But this 
disclosed that the key identifier of the database structure was the 
word "target." They don't call these people "subscribers" or "users" or 
whatever, they call them "targets," to which you could say, "Ok, that's 
a marketing term." 

J U LI AN : But it was internally private. 

ANDY: Yes, but in a military sense it could also be target, or it could 
be in an intelligence sense target. So it is just is a matter of the cir- 
cumstances in which the data is being used. 

JULIAN: OK. That's what's so scary about it. 

ANDY: I think that is very helpful. We used to say with Facebook that 
the user is not actually the customer. The Facebook user is actually the 
product, and the real customer is the advertising companies. That's the 
least paranoid, most harmless explanation of what's going on there. 

But the problem is you can hardly blame a company for com- 
plying with the laws of the country. It's called normal, and it's called 
criminal if companies don't comply with the laws of the country. 



57 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



So it's a little bit of a hard thing to say, "Hey, they're complying with 
the law." What kind of accusation is that? 

JACOB: No, there is something I have to dispute about that. If you 
build a system that logs everything about a person and you know 
that you live in a country with laws that will force the govern- 
ment to give that up, then maybe you shouldn't build that kind of 
system. And this is the difference between a privacy-by-policy and a 
privacy-by-design approach to creating secure systems. When you're 
trying to target people and you know that you live in a country that 
explicitly targets people, then if Facebook puts its servers in Gaddafi's 
Libya or puts them in Assad's Syria that would be absolutely negli- 
gent. And yet none of the National Security Letters that went out, 
I think last year or two years ago, were for terrorism. Like, 250,000 of 
them were used for everything else, but not terrorism. 62 So knowing 
that's reality, these companies have some serious ethical liability that 
stems from the fact that they're building these systems and they've 
made the economic choice to basically sell their users out. And this 
isn't even a technical thing. This isn't about technology at all, it's about 
economics. They have decided that it is more important to collab- 
orate with the state and to sell out their users and to violate their 
privacy and to be a part of the system of control — to be paid back 
for being a part of the surveillance culture, to be part of the culture 
of control — than to be resistant to it, and so they become a part of it. 
They're complicit and liable. 

ANDY: Ethical liability is not exactly a major selling point right 
now, huh? 



58 



FIGHTING TOTAL SURVEILLANCE WITH THE 
LAWS OF PHYSICS 



JEREMIE: A question that may arise at this stage is what is the solution, 
either for an individual user or for society as a whole? There are tech- 
nical solutions — decentralized services, everybody hosting their own 
data, encrypted data, everybody trusting providers close to them that 
help them with encrypted data services, and so on. And there are the 
policy options that we have discussed. I'm not sure that at this stage 
in time that we can answer the question of whether one of the two 
approaches is the best. I think we have to develop the two approaches 
in parallel. We need to have free software that everybody can under- 
stand, everybody can modify, and everybody can scrutinize in order to 
be sure of what it is doing. I think free software is one of the bases for a 
free online society, in order to have the potential to always control the 
machine and not let the machine control you. We need to have strong 
cryptography to be sure that when you want your data to be read only 
by yourself, nobody else can read it. We need communication tools 
like Tor, or like the Cryptophone, to be able to communicate only with 
the people you want to communicate with. But the power of the state 
and the power of some companies may always exceed the power of the 
geeks we are, and our ability to build and spread those technologies. 
We may also need, while we are building those technologies, laws and 



59 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



tools that will be in the hands of citizens, to be able to control what is 
being done with technology — if not always in real time — and to be able 
to sanction those that use technology in an unethical way and in a way 
that violates citizens' privacy. 

JULIAN: I want to look at what I see as a difference between a US 
cypherpunk perspective and the European perspective. The US Sec- 
ond Amendment is the right to bear arms. Just recently I was watch- 
ing some footage that a friend shot in the US on the right to bear 
arms, and above a firearms store was a sign saying, "Democracy, 
Locked and Loaded." That's the way that you ensure that you don't 
have totalitarian regimes — people are armed and if they are pissed 
off enough then they simply take their arms and they retake con- 
trol by force. Whether that argument is still valid now is actually an 
interesting question because of the difference in the types of arms 
that has occurred over the past thirty years. We can look back to 
this declaration that code-making — providing secret cryptographic 
codes that the government couldn't spy on — was in fact a munition. 
We fought this big war in the 1990s to try and make cryptography 
available to everyone, which we largely won. 63 

JACOB: In the West. 

JULIAN: In the West we largely won and it is in every browser, 
although perhaps it is now being back-doored and subverted in 
different kinds of ways. 64 The notion is that you cannot trust a gov- 
ernment to implement the policies that it says it is implementing, 
and so we must provide the underlying tools, cryptographic tools 



60 



CYPHERPUNKS 



that we control, as a sort of use of force, in that if the ciphers are good 
no matter how hard it tries a government cannot break into your 
communications directly. 

JACOB: The force of nearly all modern authority is derived from violence 
or the threat of violence. One must acknowledge with cryptography no 
amount of violence will ever solve a math problem. 

JULIAN: Exactly. 

JACOB: This is the important key. It doesn't mean you cant be tor- 
tured, it doesn't mean that they can't try to bug your house or subvert 
it in some way, but it means that if they find an encrypted message it 
doesn't matter if they have the force of the authority behind everything 
that they do, they cannot solve that math problem. This, though, is the 
thing that is totally non-obvious to people that are non- technical, and 
it has to be driven home. If we could solve all of those math problems, 
it would be a different story and, of course, the government would be 
able to solve those math problems if anyone could. 

J U LI AN : But it just happens to be a fact about reality, such as that you 
can build atomic bombs, that there are math problems that you can 
create that even the strongest state cannot break. I think that was 
tremendously appealing to Californian libertarians and others who 
believed in this sort of "democracy locked and loaded" idea, because 
here was a very intellectual way of doing it — of a couple of individu- 
als with cryptography standing up to the full might of the strongest 
power in the world. 



61 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



So there is a property of the universe that is on the side of 
privacy, because some encryption algorithms are impossible for 
any government to break, ever. There are others that we know are 
extremely hard for even the NSA to break. We know that because 
they recommend those algorithms be used by US military contrac- 
tors for the protection of top secret US military communications, 
and if there was some kind of back-door in them soon enough the 
Russians or the Chinese would find it, with severe consequences 
for whoever made the decision to recommend an insecure cipher. 
So the ciphers are fairly good now, we're pretty confident in them. 
Unfortunately you can't be confident at all in the machine that you're 
running them on, so that's a problem. But that doesn't lead to bulk 
interception; it leads to the targeting of particular people's comput- 
ers. Unless you're a security expert it's very hard to actually secure a 
computer. But cryptography can solve the bulk interception prob- 
lem, and it's the bulk interception problem which is a threat to global 
civilization. Individual targeting is not the threat. 

Nevertheless, I have a view that we are dealing with really tre- 
mendously big economic and political forces, as Jeremie said, and 
the likely outcome is that the natural efficiencies of surveillance tech- 
nologies compared to the number of human beings will mean that 
slowly we will end up in a global totalitarian surveillance society — by 
totalitarian I mean a total surveillance — and that perhaps there will 
just be the last free living people, those who understand how to use 
this cryptography to defend against this complete, total surveillance, 
and some people who are completely off-grid, neo-Luddites that 
have gone into the cave, or traditional tribes-people who have none 
of the efficiencies of a modern economy and so their ability to act is 



62 



CYPHERPUNKS 



very small. Of course anyone can stay off the internet, but then it's 
hard for them to have any influence. They select themselves out of 
being influential by doing that. It's the same with mobile phones; you 
can choose not to have a mobile phone but you reduce your influ- 
ence. It's not a way forward. 

JEREMIE: If you look at it from a market perspective, I'm convinced 
that there is a market in privacy that has been mostly left unexplored, 
so maybe there will be an economic drive for companies to develop 
tools that will give users the individual ability to control their data 
and communication. Maybe this is one way that we can solve that 
problem. I'm not sure it can work alone, but this may happen and we 
may not know it yet. 

JULIAN: Cryptography is going to be everywhere. It is being 
deployed by major organizations everywhere, edging towards net- 
worked city states. If you think about communication paths on the 
internet — fast transnational money flows, transnational organiza- 
tions, inter-connections between sub-parts of organizations — all 
those communication flows go over untrusted communications 
channels. It is like an organism with no skin. You have organiza- 
tions and states blurring into each other — each network of world 
influence competing for advantage — and their communications 
flows are exposed to opportunists, state competitors and so on. 
So new networks are being built up on top of the internet, virtual 
private networks, and their privacy comes from cryptography. That 
is an industrial power base that is stopping cryptography from 
being banned. 



63 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



If you look at the Blackberry phone for example, it has a built-in 
encryption system for use within the Blackberry network. Research 
In Motion, the Canadian company that runs it, can decrypt the 
traffic of regular users and it has data centers in Canada and the UK, 
at least, and so the Anglo-American intelligence sharing alliance can 
get at the world's Blackberry to Blackberry communications. But big 
companies are using it in more secure ways. Western governments 
were fine with this until it spread beyond corporations and to indi- 
viduals, and then we saw exactly the same hostile political reactions 
as we saw in Mubarak's Egypt. 65 

I think that the only effective defense against the coming surveil- 
lance dystopia is one where you take steps yourself to safeguard your 
privacy, because there's no incentive for self-restraint by the people 
that have the capacity to intercept everything. A historical analogy 
could be how people learned that they should wash their hands. That 
required the germ theory of disease to be established and then pop- 
ularized, and for paranoia to be instilled about the spread of disease 
via invisible stuff on your hands that you can't see, just as you can't see 
mass interception. Once there was enough understanding, soap man- 
ufacturers produced products that people consumed to relieve their 
fear. It's necessary to install fear in to people so they understand the 
problem before they will create enough demand to solve the problem. 

There is a problem on the opposite side of the equation as well, 
which is that programs that claim to be secure, that claim to have 
cryptography in them, are often frauds, because cryptography is 
complex, and the fraud can be hidden in complexity. 66 

So people will have to think about it. The only question is in 
which one of the two ways will they think about it? They will either 



64 



CYPHERPUNKS 



think, "I need to be careful about what I say, I need to conform," the 
whole time, in every interaction. Or they will think "I need to master 
little components of this technology and install things that protect 
me so I'm able to express my thoughts freely and communicate freely 
with my friends and people I care about." If people don't take that 
second step then we'll have a universal political correctness, because 
even when people are communicating with their closest friends they 
will be self-censors and will remove themselves as political actors 
from the world. 



65 



THE INTERNET AND POLITICS 



J E R E M I E : It is interesting to see the power of the hackers — "hackers" in 
the primary sense of the term, not a criminal. A hacker is a technology 
enthusiast, somebody who likes to understand how technology works, 
not to be trapped into technology but to make it work better. I suppose 
that when you were five or seven you had a screwdriver and tried to 
open devices to understand what it was like inside. This is what being 
a hacker is, and hackers built the internet for many reasons, includ- 
ing because it was fun, and they have developed it and have given the 
internet to everybody else. Companies like Google and Facebook saw 
the opportunity to then build business models based on capturing 
users' personal data. But still we see a form of power in the hands of 
hackers. My primary interest these days is that we see these hackers 
gaining power, even in the political arenas. In the US there has been 
this SOPA (Stop Online Piracy Act) and PIPA (Protect IP Act) legisla- 
tion — violent copyright legislation that basically gives Hollywood the 
power to order any internet company to restrict access and to censor 
the internet. 67 

JULIAN: And banking blockades like the one WikiLeaks is suffering 
from. 68 



67 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



J E REM IE: Exactly. What happened to WikiLeaks from the banking 
companies was becoming the standard method to fight the evil copy- 
right pirates that killed Hollywood and so on. And we witnessed this 
tremendous uproar from civil society on the internet — and not only 
in the US, it couldn't have worked if it was only US citizens who rose 
up against SOPA and PIPA. It was people all around the world that 
participated, and hackers were at the core of it and were providing 
tools to the others to help participate in the public debate. 

JULIAN: To help build the campaign. 

J E REM IE: Was it on Tumblr or some site like this where the home 
page lets you enter your phone number and you'll be called back and 
put in touch with the Congress? And you would just start talking 
with somebody and say, "Yeah, this is bullshit." 

JACOB: The internet was used in defense of itself. 

JEREMIE: I think we hackers have a responsibility towards the tools 
we build and hand out to the rest of the world, and we may be wit- 
nessing the beginning of how efficiently this responsibility can be put 
into action when we use it collectively. Today in the EU there is the 
ACTA debate — ACTA (the Anti- Counterfeiting Trade Agreement) 
is a multinational treaty that is the blueprint for SOPA and PIPA. 69 
I just came back from the European Parliament where we as individ- 
uals, beardy smelly individuals, were dictating to one parliamentary 
committee. We were showing them articles in the rules of procedure in 
the European Parliament that apparently they were looking at for the 



68 



CYPHERPUNKS 



first time and told them how to behave, and there was this vote that we 
won by 21 to 5 which marginalized the British Rapporteur in a small 
corner. This is a very small part of a small procedural point on the way 
towards defeating ACTA, this monstrous global agreement that has 
been designed behind our backs to circumvent democracy itself. But 
we may as citizens be able to kill that monster — easily, with the internet 
tools, the mailing lists, the wikis, the IRC chat rooms, et cetera — and I 
think that we may be witnessing the coming of age, the teenage years 
of the internet and the way that it can be used by society at large to try 
to make things change. I think it is of tremendous importance that we 
hackers are here with our technical knowledge to guide people and to 
tell them, "You should use this technology that enables control over 
your privacy rather than Facebook or Google," and that the two artic- 
ulate together quite well — or may articulate together quite well. This is 
a small bit of optimism. 

JULIAN: Jake, on this political radicalization of internet youth, over 
the past two years especially you've been all over the world talking 
about Tor, talking to people who want anonymity, who want privacy 
in relation to their own government, and you must have seen this 
phenomenon in many different countries. Is it something significant? 

JACOB: Sure. I think it is absolutely significant. The canonical example 
that I think of immediately is going to Tunisia. I went to Tunisia after 
Ben Ali's regime fell and we talked about Tor in a computer science 
class, which includes some very technical people at the university, and 
someone raised their hand and said, "But what about the bad people?" 
And she rattled off the Four Horsemen of the Info-pocalypse — money 



69 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



laundering, drugs, terrorism and child pornography. "What about the 
bad people?" Those four things are always brought out and the spec- 
ter of them is used to shoot down privacy-preserving technologies, 
because clearly we have to defeat those four groups. So I asked the 
class: "Who here has ever seen the Ammar 404 page?" which is the 
censorship page deployed by the Ben Ali regime before and during the 
revolution in order to stop access. Every single person in the room, 
except the person that asked that question, but including the professor 
in the class, raised their hand. And I looked at the girl who asked this 
question and I said, "Look at all the people around you. That's all of 
your classmates. Do you really believe that it was worth oppressing 
every person in this room in order to fight against those things?" And 
she said, "Actually, I'm raising my hand too". 

It was a little more drawn out than that but essentially people 
who have it contextualized for them realize what the real deal is. That 
changes things dramatically. And this happens all over the world, all 
the time — but it usually happens later, that is people see in hindsight 
that they could have used the technology, they see in hindsight that, 
"Oh yeah, it turns out it's not just bad people because, in fact, I am 
the bad person if I speak my mind about something and a person 
in power doesn't like what I have to say about it." And you see that 
there's an awakening. 

But it is wrong to say that it just happened in the last couple of 
years. I'm sorry to do this to you Julian, but you are part of the radi- 
calization of my generation. I'm like a third-generation cypherpunk 
if I were to count it that way. The work that you and Ralf Weinmann 
did on the rubberhose file system was part of what inspired me to 
work on cryptosystems. The crypto file system I designed, called 



70 



CYPHERPUNKS 



M.A.I.D., was in response to things like the regulatory investigative 
powers in the United Kingdom, where basically the state has decided 
negative regulation is the solution to cryptography, where they can 
take your password. 70 Of course, in Julians case when they created 
this it was because oppressive regimes would torture people for a 
passphrase so you had to be able to give up different passphrases in 
order to comply with their torture. My crypto file system, M.A.I.D., 
was designed for a legal system where the accused has the right to 
remain silent but can prove, if compelled, that they are telling the 
truth without violating confidentiality I had realized when I saw 
Julians work that you could use technology to empower everyday 
people to change the world. Going far, far back to the old Cypher- 
punk mailing list with Tim May, one of the founding members of 
it, and reading Julians old posts on the Cypherpunk list, that's what 
started a whole generation of people to really become more radical- 
ized, because people realized that they weren't atomized anymore, 
that they could take some time to write some software which could 
empower millions of people. 71 

There are just some unintended consequences with how that 
played out, because the people that created Google didn't start out to 
create Google, to create the greatest surveillance machine that ever 
existed. But in effect that is what has been created, and as soon as 
people start to realize it they'll start sending in those National Security 
Letters, right? 

JEREMIE: I think there are three crucial points in what you just said. 
JACOB: Just three? 



71 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JEREMIE: Among others. 

ANDY: Ok, let me add number four maybe, yeah? 

JACOB: You don't even know what they are yet. 

JEREMIE: I see three points that are intertwined. I'm not saying they 
should be taken separately, but one of them is authoritarian regimes 
and the powers that authoritarian regimes have in an era of digital 
technologies. In the case of the Ben Ali regime — it is obvious in so 
many regimes today — you can decide what people can learn about, 
or who they can communicate with. This is of tremendous power and 
this should be opposed, and the internet — a free internet — is a tool for 
opposing that. Another point is building tools and better technology, 
technology that can try to route around such problems as censorship, 
but basically building tools that are part of that infrastructure that helps 
us topple dictators. And yet another issue is the political storytelling 
you evoked with the Four Horsemen of the Info-pocalypse, the pre- 
texts that are used every day by politicians through the media — "Are we 
all going to die of terrorism? Therefore we need a Patriot Act;" "Child 
pornographers are everywhere;" "There are pedo-Nazis all over the 
internet, therefore we need censorship." 

JACOB: Pedo-Nazis? 

JEREMIE: Pedo-Nazis, yeah — pedo-nazi.com is reserved already. 
"Artists are going to die and there won't be cinema anymore, there- 
fore we have to give Hollywood the power to censor the internet," 



72 



CYPHERPUNKS 



and so on. I think here again the internet is a tool, an antidote to the 
political storytelling. The political storytelling relies on emotionality 
and a media time-frame that is of extremely short span — information 
appears and disappears twenty-four hours afterwards and is replaced by 
new information. With the internet, I get the feeling that we're building 
what I call internet time. As the great internet never forgets, we can build 
dossiers over years, day after day, and we can elaborate, we can analyze. 
This is what we've been doing for the last three years with ACTA. Once 
again, WikiLeaks has been an inspiration to us because the first version 
of ACTA that got leaked was leaked to WikiLeaks in 2008. 72 

JULIAN: Yes, we picked it up. 

JEREMIE: And we leaked two versions ourselves. There are five 
versions of the text over three years that we could take and paragraph 
by paragraph, line by line, say this is doing that, this is the indus- 
try asking for this, and involve legal experts and technology experts 
and build a version of political storytelling that was different from 
the official, "Oh, we need ACTA to save culture and save children 
from fake medications," and such. And so we built our own political 
line with internet time, with precise analysis, with hard work, with 
connecting people together to participate in that. 

JULIAN: That's true, and I think that view of ACTA has won the 
public. 

JEREMIE: So far, so good. 



73 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



J U LI AN : That I think will be the historical view, but behind the scenes 
this so-called Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, which was 
originated by the US copyright industry, has actually been used in 
a whole lot of bilateral treaties to try and create a new international 
regime about what is legal and what is not legal as far as publishing 
is concerned, and what mechanisms there are to stop people from 
publishing various things. It standardizes a harsher version of the 
US DMCA system (the Digital Millennium Copyright Act), under 
which if you send someone a letter demanding they take something 
down from the internet, they have to take it down, and there is some 
sort of two week process where they can make counter- arguments 
and so on but because it is expensive for any ISP publisher to deal 
with the counter- argument they just take it down immediately, and 
they allow the author or the uploader to try and fight it out them- 
selves. The effect of it has been quite severe in the US, in removing 
a whole bunch of content. Scientology abused it to remove literally 
thousands of videos from YouTube. 73 

So let's assume that ACTA has been knocked out in the European 
Parliament, actually successfully, at least this iteration. But the main 
developments of ACTA seem to be occurring anyway — we've had the 
democratic debate, ACTA has been demonized in the public sphere, 
we've won the narrative, but behind the scenes secret bilateral trea- 
ties have been set up which are achieving the same result, it has just 
subverted the democratic process. For example WikiLeaks got hold 
of and released the new EU-India free trade agreement, and incorpo- 
rated in that are large chunks of ACTA. 74 That has been happening to 
a number of other agreements and legislation. The ACTA head might 
well get cut off but the body will split into a few bits and they will all 



74 



CYPHERPUNKS 



worm their way into things, into the international order in the form 
of all these bilateral treaties. So you can have your democratic victo- 
ries that take place in public, on the surface, but underneath things 
are still done anyway. Which is to show that I don't think that policy 
or legislative reform is the way; although you cant give the opponent 
a free kick either, because then they just accelerate. So it is important 
to check them in various ways, as ACTA is being checked. It slows 
them down. But even a win in parliament in relation to legislation 
doesn't stop this below the surface activity. 

JACOB: One thing that I think really has to be pointed out is that Roger 
Dingledine, one of the creators of Tor, who I would say is sort of my 
mentor and has really given me a lot to think about with regard to 
censorship circumvention and anonymity online, talks about how, 
for example, firewalls are not just technically successful — and it is 
important to understand the technology behind them if you wish 
to build technology to resist them — but they are socially successful. 
People who are fighting against ACTA are using technology and the 
technology enables them to resist, but it is in fact the agency of every- 
day people that it's important to understand here, and technobabble 
is not the thing that is important. What matters is people actually get- 
ting involved in that narrative and changing it while they still have 
the power to do so, and the human aspect of that is, in fact, the most 
important part. WikiLeaks has released documents that enable that, 
and the information-sharing is important, but it is also the people 
who take that important information and actually move it who mat- 
ter. Because there is at least the argument that many of us might live 
in a democracy, that we are free, that it is supposed to be that we are 



75 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



governed through consent. And so if everyone understands what is 
going on and we find it is not something we consent to, then it is very 
difficult to keep going and just pass those as laws and do it without the 
consent of those that are governed. 

JEREMIE: It's about increasing the political costs of taking those bad 
decisions for the ones who take them, and we can do that collectively 
with a free internet as long as we have it between our hands. 

JACOB: But you could do it without an internet also, because we 
have — historically — had free societies pre-internet, it was just eco- 
nomically more expensive, it was more difficult in some ways, and 
this is actually why the peer-to-peer movement is so important. 75 

ANDY: Point number four is, I think, the architectural dimension 
of decentralized systems is a core thing that also needs to be put in 
the hands of the people, because now we have this centralized cloud 
computing. 76 

JULIAN: We have Facebook completely centralized. Twitter completely 
centralized. Google completely centralized. All in the United States; all 
controllable by whoever controls coercive force. Just like the censor- 
ship that started after WikiLeaks released Cablegate, when Amazon 
dropped our site from its servers. 77 

ANDY: And we have cloud computing providing an economic incen- 
tive for companies to have a cheaper way of processing their data in 
so-called international data centers run by US corporations, which 



76 



CYPHERPUNKS 



means bringing the data into US jurisdictions, just like the payment 
companies and so on. 

JULIAN: There is a tendency within the shift to cloud computing 
that is quite worrying. There are enormous clusters of servers all in 
one location, because it is more efficient to standardize control of 
the environment, to standardize the payment system. It is a com- 
petitive technique because piling up servers in the one location is 
cheaper than spreading them out. Most of the communication that 
occurs on the internet, except for streaming movies, is between 
server and server, so if you put the servers closer together it is 
cheaper. We end up with these big hives of communicating servers. 
It makes sense for Google, for example, to put its servers near the 
big content providers, or the other way around, because the pages 
are indexed by Google to be searchable. So there are huge build- 
ings in the US that are just completely filled with servers from many 
different companies. That's where the NSA places some of its mass 
interception collection points. The internet could exist without this 
centralization, it's not that the technology is impossible, it's just that 
it is simply more efficient to have it centralized. In economic com- 
petition, the centralized version wins out. 

ANDY: While the architectural point of view is very important to 
understand — centralized infrastructures make central control and 
abuse of power very easy — this is also like killing the small super- 
market next door with a centralized retail concept. 

JULIAN: And going to a big, big multinational like Safeway. 



77 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



ANDY: Yes, the same way that it happened with shopping. It's very 
important to keep up a decentralized infrastructure approach. When 
I was part of ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers, which makes and regulates the domain names on 
the internet, I learned something from Vince Cerf, who invented at 
least part of the TCP/IP protocol, the fundamental communication 
protocol of the internet. He always used to say, "You know, one good 
thing about governments is they're never singular, they're always 
in plural." So even among governments, there are those that want 
to have their own decentralized range of power, and even within 
governments there are different factions fighting with each other. 
That is finally what is going to save us from Big Brother, because 
there are going to be too many who want to be Big Brother and they 
will have fights amongst each other. 

JULIAN: I don't think so, Andy. I think once upon a time we had 
national elites that were competitive with each other, and now they're 
linking together and they're lifting off their respective populations. 

ANDY: They are linking together, you are right in that respect — and 
I'm not so sure it's really going to save our ass — but there is the chance 
of actually keeping our own identity. We have to stick to our own 
infrastructure, that's the important thing to learn here — that if we 
want to oppose the surveillance state, the one Big Brother, we have 
to study what that is, whether it is indeed a linking of central states 
that say, "Hey, if we combine we can gain even more." And we need 
to know what our role is here — our role is to keep decentralized, 



78 



CYPHERPUNKS 



have our own infrastructure, not rely on cloud computing and other 
bullshit, but have our own thing. 

JULIAN: But we may have this domination of technique. If its a fact 
that it's easier to use Twitter than start your own Twitter; if it's a fact 
that it's easier to use Facebook than DIASPORA, or some alternative; 
if it's a fact that cloud computing is cheaper, then these techniques and 
services will dominate. 78 It's not a matter of saying that we should start 
our own local services, because these local services simply will not be 
competitive, and they will only ever be used by a small minority of 
people. We need something better than saying that we should have a 
poor-man's version of Facebook and expect people to use it. 

ANDY: Well, coming back to the Catholic Church, we're going back 
to times where there is one major issuer of books, as Amazon is 
trying to control the complete supply chain of e-books, so we must 
keep our own printing/publishing capabilities. This might sound a 
bit over-reaching, but we have seen what these companies can do if 
they or the governmental agencies they depend on in their jurisdic- 
tion don't want stuff to be happening. And I think the next step will 
obviously have to be that we need our own money, so that even if 
they don't like the fact that we support projects like WikiLeaks or 
whatever, we have our own way to do that without relying on a central 
infrastructure which all goes through one jurisdiction. 

J E REM IE: I would like to agree with Andy. I think that architecture 
matters and this is central to everything we stand for. But this is a mes- 
sage that we have a responsibility to convey to the public, because we 



79 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



understand it, as hackers, as technicians who build the internet every 
day and play with it. And maybe this is a way to win the hearts and 
minds of the younger generations. I think this is why the copyright 
wars are so essential, because with peer-to-peer technologies, since 
Napster in 1999, people just understood — got it — that by sharing files 
between individuals. . . 

JULIAN: You're a criminal. 

JEREMIE: No, you build better culture. 

JULIAN: No, you're a criminal. 

JEREMIE: That's the storytelling, but if you build a better culture for 
yourself, everybody will use Napster. 79 

AN DY: The history of the human race and the history of culture is the 
history of copying thoughts, modifying and processing them further 
on, and if you call it stealing, then you're like all the cynics. 

JEREMIE: Exactly, exactly! Culture is meant to be shared. 

JULIAN: Well, in the West since the 1950s we've had industrial cul- 
ture. Our culture has become an industrial product. 

JEREMIE: We are feeding the troll here because he's playing the devil's 
advocate and he's doing it very well. 



80 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: I'm not biting. It's such obvious bullshit. 

JEREMIE: It is bullshit. In the political storytelling it is called stealing, 
but I want to make my point that everybody who used Napster back 
in 1999 became a music fan and then went to concerts and became a 
descriptor telling everybody, "You should listen to those people, you 
should go to that concert" and so on. So people have had a practical 
example of how peer-to-peer technology decentralized the architec- 
ture. Actually, Napster was a bit centralized back at that time, but 
it seeded the idea of a decentralized architecture. Everybody had a 
concrete example where a decentralized architecture brought good 
to society, and when it is about sharing culture it is exactly the same 
as when it is about sharing knowledge. Sharing of knowledge is what 
we're talking about when we're discussing routing around censor- 
ship, or cutting through the political storytelling to build a better 
democratic system and to make society better. 

So, we have examples where decentralized services and sharing 
between individuals makes things better, and the counter-example 
is the devil's advocate Julian is playing, where an industry comes 
and says, "Oh, this is stealing and this is killing everybody, killing 
actors, killing Hollywood, killing cinema, killing kittens and every- 
thing." They have won battles in the past and now we may be about 
to win the ACTA battle. And I once again have to disagree with the 
devil's advocate Julian was playing earlier. ACTA has been the great- 
est example of the circumvention of democracy so far, of sitting on 
the face of parliament and the international institutions, sitting on 
the face of public opinion and imposing unacceptable measures 
through the back door. If we manage to kick that out, then we will 



81 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



set a precedent, then we will have an opportunity to push for a 
positive agenda, to say, "ACTA is over, now let's go and do some- 
thing that really goes in the favor of the public." And we're working 
towards that and some members of the European Parliament now 
understand that when individuals share things, when they share files 
without a profit, they shouldn't go to jail, they shouldn't be punished. 
I think that if we manage that one we have a strong case for exposing 
to the rest of the world that the sharing of knowledge, the sharing of 
information, makes things better, that we have to promote it and not 
fight it, and that any attempt — whether it's legislative or from a dicta- 
tor or from a company — to hurt our ability to share information and 
share knowledge in a decentralized way must be opposed period. 
I think we can build momentum. 

JULIAN: What about the PIPA/SOPA debate in the US? This is new 
legislation proposed in the US Congress to create financial embargoes 
and internet blockades on behalf of US industries. 

JACOB: It was created specifically to attack WikiLeaks and 
WikiLeaks-related or WikiLeaks-like things that exist. 

JULIAN: In Congress the banking blockade against us was specifically 
mentioned as an effective tool. 80 

JEREMIE: And it was about giving this tool to Hollywood. 

JULIAN: So we had a big community campaign against it and eventually 
Google and Wikipedia and a bunch of others joined that campaign. 



82 



CYPHERPUNKS 



But I didn't go, "Ok, that's great, we've won that battle." That scared the 
hell out of me, because Google suddenly saw itself as a political player 
and not just a distributor, and it felt that tremendous, enormous power 
over Congress. 

J E RE M I E: Google was just one bit of the anti-SOPA and PIPA coalition. 

JACOB: Yes, but hang on, Tumblr, I think, made more of an impact 
than Google did. 

ANDY: Tumblr and Wikipedia and tons of individual actions, 
very small actions you may never have heard of, made an impact. 
There were thousands of them being parallelized — going in the 
same direction — and that's, again, decentralized political action. 
It's a decentralized political movement that we have witnessed. 
Google may have been the biggest actor that you've noticed among 
the others. 

JULIAN: Well, it's what Congress said that it noticed. 

JACOB: I take a little bit of an issue with what Jeremie said earlier 
because you essentially promote the idea of a political vanguard. 
I don't think you meant to do that but you did, and I just wanted to 
stop you right there, because the peer-to-peer movement is explicitly 
against a political vanguard. It's the idea that we are all peers and we 
can share between each other; we may provide different services or 
we may provide different functionality. Once Ross Anderson said to 
me, "When I joined the peer-to-peer movement fifty years ago," which 



83 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



I thought was a fantastic opener. He explained that he wanted to ensure 
that we never un-invented the printing press. Because as we start to 
centralize services, as we start to centralize control of information 
systems, we actually do start to un-invent the printing press in the 
sense that the Encyclopedia Britannica no longer prints books and 
they only print CDs — if you don't have a general-purpose computer 
that can read those CDs, you don't have access to that knowledge. Now, 
in the case of the Encyclopedia Britannica it doesn't matter because we 
have Wikipedia and we have a lot of other material. But I don't think 
as a society that we're ready. 

ANDY: I'm not sure Wikipedia is all that good compared as a resource. 
I don't trust a single page there that I didn't re-write myself. 

JACOB: But the Encyclopedia Britannica is no different. It's just one 
source of many, and what matters is the verification of the data. All 
I mean to say is that we should not promote this idea of a vanguard 
because it is very dangerous. 

JULIAN: Hang on, why? I'm a bit of a vanguard. What's the problem 
with them? 

j£r£M!E: I'm not talking about vanguards, I'm just saying that we have 
new tools between our hands. We were mentioning the printing press. 
Another visionary, a friend of mine Benjamin Bayart, maybe less well- 
known in the non-French speaking world, said, "The printing press 
taught the people how to read; the internet taught the people how to 



84 



CYPHERPUNKS 



write." 81 This is something very new, this is a new ability for everyone 
to be able to write and express themselves. 

AN DY: Yes, but filtering is becoming even more important these days. 

JEREMIE: Sure because everybody talks, and many people say bullshit. 
As the academic and activist Larry Lessig and, I guess, so many other 
teachers will tell you, we teach people how to write but when students 
give in their papers, ninety-nine point something per cent of them are 
crap, but nevertheless we teach them how to write. 82 And so, of course, 
people say bullshit on the internet — that's obvious. But to be able to 
use this ability to express yourself in public makes you more and more 
constructed in your way of speaking over time, more and more able 
to participate in complex discussions. And all the phenomena we're 
describing are built around engineered complexity that we need to 
break down into small parts in order to be able to understand and 
debate calmly It's not about a political vanguard, it's about channeling 
through the political system this new ability to express ourselves that 
we all have between our hands, to share our thoughts, to participate in 
the sharing of knowledge without being a member of a political party, 
of a media company, or of whatever centralized structure you needed 
in the past in order to be able to express yourself. 



85 



THE INTERNET AND ECONOMICS 



JULIAN: I want to look at three basic freedoms. When I interviewed 
the head of Hezbollah, Hassan Nasrallah. . . 

JACOB: Where's that fucking drone strike? What's that up there? 

JULIAN: Well, he has his own kind of house arrest as well because he 
can't leave his secret location. 

JACOB: I'm not sure that I would make that comparison. Please don't 
make that comparison. 

JULIAN: There's a question whether Hezbollah has the ingredients 
of a state — has it actually become a state? This is something that 
is mentioned in the US embassy cables, that Hezbollah has devel- 
oped its own fiber optic network in south Lebanon. 83 So, it has the 
three primary ingredients of a state — it has control over armed force 
within a particular region, it has a communications infrastructure 
that it has control over, and it has a financial infrastructure that it 
has control over. And we can also think about this as three basic 
liberties. The liberty of freedom of movement, physical freedom of 



87 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



movement — your ability to travel from one place to another, to not 
have armed force deployed against you. We can think about the lib- 
erty of freedom of thought, and freedom of communication, which 
is inherently wrapped up in freedom of thought — if there's a threat 
against you for speaking publicly, the only way to safeguard your 
right to communicate is to communicate privately. And finally, the 
freedom of economic interaction, which is also coupled, like the 
freedom of communication, to the privacy of economic interaction. 
So let's speak about these ideas that have been brewing in the cypher- 
punks since the 1990s of trying to provide this very important third 
freedom, which is the freedom of economic interaction. 

J E REM IE: But why would you need only three freedoms? In my 
European Charter for Fundamental Rights there are more. 

JULIAN: Privacy becomes important either from a communitarian 
perspective, which is you need privacy in order to communicate 
freely and to think freely, or you need it for your economic inter- 
action in some way. So I think there are more derivative freedoms 
but these — the first three that I said — are the fundamental freedoms 
from which other freedoms derive. 

J E REM IE: Well, there is a legal definition to fundamental freedom. 

JULIAN: But I've read the EU Charter and I can tell you that it's an 
absolute dog's breakfast of consensus. 



88 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JEREMIE: Yes, OK, and the lobbies managed to put intellectual 
property in the EU Charter. 

JULIAN: All sorts of crazy, crazy things. 

ANDY: I do think there is a point that we can agree on, which is that 
the money system, the economic infrastructure to interchange money, 
totally sucks at the moment. And even anybody who just has an eBay 
account will wildly agree with that, because what Paypal is doing, what 
Visa and MasterCard are doing, is actually putting people in a de facto 
monopoly situation. There was this very interesting thing from the 
WikiLeaks cables also, that said that the Russian government tried to 
negotiate a way that Visa and MasterCard payments from Russian citi- 
zens within Russia would have to be processed in Russia, and Visa and 
MasterCard actually refused it. 84 

JULIAN: Yes the power of the US embassy and Visa combined was 
enough to prevent even Russia from coming up with its own domestic 
payment card system within Russia. 

ANDY: Meaning that even payments from Russian citizens within 
Russian-to-Russian shops will be processed through American data 
centers. So the US government will have jurisdictional control, or at 
least insight. 

JULIAN: Yes, so when Putin goes out to buy a Coke, thirty seconds 
later it is known in Washington DC. 



89 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



ANDY: And that, of course, is a very unsatisfying situation, independent 
of whether I like the US or not. This is just a very dangerous thing to 
have a central place where all payments are stored, because it invites all 
kinds of usage of that data. 

JACOB: One of the fundamental things the cypherpunks recognized 
is that the architecture actually defines the political situation, so if 
you have a centralized architecture, even if the best people in the 
world are in control of it, it attracts assholes and those assholes do 
things with their power that the original designers would not do. 
And it's important to know that that goes for money. 

JULIAN: Like oil wells in Saudi Arabia as well, the curse of oil. 

J ACO B: No matter where we look we can see, especially with financial 
systems, that effectively even if the people have the best of intentions, 
it doesn't matter. The architecture is the truth. It's the truth of the 
internet with regard to communications. The so-called lawful inter- 
cept systems, which is just a nice way of saying spying on people. . . 

JULIAN: It's a euphemism, lawful interception. 

JACOB: Absolutely, like lawful murder. 

ANDY: Or lawful torture. 

JACOB: You've heard about the lawful drone strikes on 
American citizens by the US president, Obama? When he killed 



90 



CYPHERPUNKS 



Anwar al-Awlaki's sixteen-year-old son in Yemen that was lawful 
murder, or targeted killing as they put it. 85 So-called lawful inter- 
cept is the same thing — you just put lawful in front of everything 
and then all of a sudden because the state does it, it is legitimate. 
But in fact it's the architecture of the state that allows them to do 
that at all, it's the architecture of the laws and the architecture of the 
technology, just as it's the architecture of financial systems. 

What the cypherpunks wanted to do was to create systems that 
allow us to compensate each other in a truly free way where it is 
not possible to interfere. Like Chaumian currencies, which are elec- 
tronic currencies designed according to the specifications of David 
Chaum, the originator of eCash (a fully anonymous electronic cur- 
rency), although you could argue that they are more centralized than 
is necessary. The idea is to be able to create anonymous currencies, 
as opposed to Visa/MasterCard, which is a tracking currency. While 
built around a central authority, Chaumian currencies use cryp- 
tographic protocols invented by David Chaum in order to ensure 
anonymous transactions. 86 

J U LI AN : So, basically electronic cash but without, say, serial numbers 
on the cash. 

JACOB: Or serial numbers that allow you to establish that it is valid 
currency but don't allow you to know that Julian paid Andy, or what 
the amount was necessarily. 

JEREMIE: It's recreating cash in the digital world, actually. 



91 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JULIAN: Creating an electronic currency is a big deal precisely because 
control over the medium of exchange is one of the three ingredients of 
a state, as I was saying with regard to Hezbollah. If you take away the 
states monopoly over the means of economic interaction, then you take 
away one of the three principal ingredients of the state. In the model of 
the state as a mafia, where the state is a protection racket, the state shakes 
people down for money in every possible way. Controlling currency 
flows is important for revenue-raising by the state, but it is also import- 
ant for simply controlling what people do — incentivizing one thing, 
disincentivizing another thing, completely banning a certain activity, or 
an organization, or interactions between organizations. So, for exam- 
ple, with the extraordinary financial blockade against WikiLeaks, it's not 
the free market that has decided to blockade WikiLeaks, because it's not 
a free market — government regulation has made particular financial 
players kings and doesn't allow other market entrants. Economic free- 
dom has been impinged by an elite group that is able to influence both 
regulation and the principles involved in these banks. 87 

ANDY: Sad to say, this is the unsolved problem of the electronic world 
right now. Two credit companies, both with a US based electronic 
infrastructure for clearance — meaning access to the data in the US 
jurisdiction — control most of the credit card payments of the planet. 
Companies like Paypal, which is also governed under US jurisdiction, 
apply US policies, be it blocking the sale of Cuban cigars from German 
online retailers or the blockade of payments to WikiLeaks in non-US 
jurisdictions. This means the US government has access to data and 
the option to impose payment controls on worldwide payments. 



92 



CYPHERPUNKS 



While American citizens might argue that this is the best democracy 
money can buy, for European citizens this is just priceless. 

JULIAN: In our traditional world we have had to a degree freedom of 
movement, not so great in some cases. 

JACOB: Are you sure, Julian? I feel like your freedom of movement is 
a classic example of how free we really are. 

JULIAN: Well no, the UK has announced it's going to put 100,000 peo- 
ple per year in my condition. 88 So I think that is collateral to a degree. 

JACOB: This is the reason why the founders of my country shot people 
from Britain. There's a reason we shot the British. And it still exists 
today! The tyranny exists. 

JEREMIE: Let's not get personal. 

ANDY: What your country, the US, is currently doing is privatizing 
prisons and negotiating contracts that guarantee a 90 per cent filling 
rate to the private companies running these former US government 
prisons. 89 Well, what is that? That is capitalism as absurd as it can get. 

JULIAN: There are more people in US prisons than there were in the 
Soviet Union. 

JACOB: This is this fallacy where, because I object to something that 
is wrong you can suggest that I am part of something that is equally 



93 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



wrong. I'm not suggesting that the United States is perfect. I think 
the United States is actually pretty great in a lot of ways, but specifi- 
cally with regard to the Founding Fathers' rhetoric. 

JULIAN: The Founding Fathers' rhetoric is in clear dissolution in the 
past ten years. 

JACOB: We must not forget that a lot of perception about the Found- 
ing Father's rhetoric is mythology and we should be cautious about 
idolizing them. So, yes, of course. All I mean to say by my comment 
about British tyranny and the situation that Julian finds himself in is 
that this is actually a cultural thing. This is where society comes in 
and where society is very important, and it's very difficult for the 
technology to supplant that. And financial issues are the most dan- 
gerous thing to be working on. There is a reason why the person that 
created another electronic currency, Bitcoin, did so anonymously. You 
do not want to be the person that invents the first really successful 
electronic currency. 90 

JULIAN: The guys who did e-gold ended up being prosecuted in 
the US. 91 

JACOB: It's so incredibly frustrating. 

JULIAN: I want to go back to these three fundamental freedoms: 
freedom of communication, freedom of movement and freedom of 
economic interaction. If we look at the transition of our global soci- 
ety onto the internet, when we made that transition the freedom 



94 



CYPHERPUNKS 



of personal movement is unchanged essentially. The freedom of 
communication is enhanced tremendously in some ways, in that we 
can now communicate to many more people; on the other hand it is 
also tremendously degraded because there is no privacy anymore, and 
so our communications can be spied on, and are spied on and stored 
and, as a result, can be used against us. And so that elementary inter- 
action that we have with people physically is degraded. 

AN DY: Privacy is available but it comes at a cost. 

JULIAN: Our economic interactions have suffered precisely the same 
consequences. So in a traditional economic interaction, who knows 
about it? The people who saw you go down to the market. Now, who 
knows about your economic interaction? If you buy something from 
your next-door neighbor with your Visa card, which you could have 
done in a traditional market society almost completely privately, 
who knows about it now? 

JACOB: Everybody. 

JULIAN: Everybody knows. They have the data sharing between all the 
major Western powers, they all know about it and they store it forever. 

AN DY: Julian, it's not wrong what you're saying, but I'm not sure you 
can really distinguish between the freedom of communication and 
the freedom of economic interaction, because the internet as we 
have it today is the infrastructure for our social, our economic, our 
cultural, our political, all our interactions. 



95 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: Certainly the freedom of movement. 

ANDY: Whatever the communication architecture is, the money is 
just bits. This is just a usage of the internet. So if the economic sys- 
tem is based on the electronic infrastructure, the architecture of the 
electronic infrastructure says something about how the money flow 
is going, how it is being controlled, how it is being centralized and 
so on. The internet was perhaps not even thought to be the infra- 
structure for everything in the first days but the economic logic said, 
"Well, it's cheaper to do that with the internet." The banks and credit 
card companies previously had ATM machines out there with X.25 
interfaces, which was a separate network ten or twenty years ago, 
and now it's all TCP/IP because it is cheaper. 92 So the architecture of 
the technology is becoming a key issue because it affects all the other 
areas, and that's what we need to actually rethink, meaning that if we 
want a decentralized economic way of handling our payments, we 
need to take the infrastructure in our hands. 

JACOB: Bitcoin is essentially an electronic currency. 

ANDY: With no inflation. 

JACOB: It tends to do it in a decentralized manner, so instead of having 
the Federal Reserve you have a bunch of people all across the world that 
together agree on what reality is, and what their current currency is. 

JULIAN: And there are some computer programs that help facilitate 
this. 



96 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: I want to explain it in a non-technical manner. It's an electronic 
currency which is more like a commodity than a currency in that peo- 
ple do determine how many euros it is to one Bitcoin. So its a little bit 
like gold in this regard and there's a cost of the so-called mining of the 
Bitcoins, where you do a search on a computer to find a Bitcoin, and the 
idea is that there's this computational complexity and it's tied to the value 
of the thing. So in non-technical terms it's a way for me to send Julian 
currency and for Julian to confirm it without Andy really being able to 
interfere or to stop it. There are some problems, though — it's not actually 
an anonymous currency, and this is a really bad thing in my opinion. 

JULIAN: Bitcoin is a very interesting hybrid, as the account hold- 
ers are completely private and you can create an account at will, but 
the transactions for the entire Bitcoin economy are completely pub- 
lic. And that is how it works; it needs to be that way in order for 
everyone to agree that a transaction has occurred, that the sending 
account now has less money and the destination that much more. 
That's one of the few ways to run a distributed currency system that 
doesn't require a central server, which would be an attractive target 
for coercive control. It is the distribution that is really innovative in 
Bitcoin, and the algorithms that permit that distribution, where you 
do not trust any particular part of, if you like, the Bitcoin banking 
network. Rather the trust is distributed. And enforcement is not 
done through law or regulation or auditing, it is done through the 
cryptographic computational difficulty that each part of the network 
has to go through to prove that it is doing what it claims. So the 
enforcement of honest Bitcoin "banking" is built into the architec- 
ture of the system. Computation translates into electricity costs for 



97 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



each branch of the Bitcoin bank, so we can assign a cost to commit 
fraud, in terms of electricity prices. The work needed to commit a 
fraud is set to be higher in electricity costs than the economic benefit 
derived from it. It is very innovative, not because these ideas hav- 
en't been explored before (they have been for over twenty years on 
paper), but because Bitcoin got the balance almost right and added 
one very innovative idea about how to prove a true global consensus 
about transactions of the Bitcoin economy, even assuming that many 
banks were fraudulent and that anyone could start one. 

Of course, just like every other currency, you have to buy the 
currency with something else; with work, or Bitcoins are traded for 
another currency — there are foreign exchange groups that do that. 
There are some other limitations. It has about a ten minute set- 
tlement time — it takes about ten minutes of computational work 
between handing over currency and the other party being sure that 
there is a global consensus that the transaction has taken place. 
It is exactly like cash, so it has all the theft problems that cash has. 
It has all the benefits as well: once you've got it you're sure that you 
have been paid, the check can't be cancelled, the bank can't retract it. 
Coercive force relations cut their ties. On the other hand, you have 
to guard cash well. That is, I think, its biggest problem. But it is quite 
easy to build additional layers on top, to build escrow services where 
you store your Bitcoins in a service that is specifically designed to 
keep them safe and add insurance against theft. 
JACOB: Interestingly, if the people that created Bitcoin had made it 
mandatory to use Tor, so you don't create an account, you create some 
cryptographic identifiers, it would have been possible if everything 
went over Tor as a core design that you did have location anonymity, 



98 



CYPHERPUNKS 



even if you had long-term identifiers that identified you so you could 
link your transactions together. 

JEREMIE: Without entering into the technical considerations we 
could agree that Bitcoin has excellent concepts but some flaws. It 
has a deflationist nature, because money tends to disappear from 
Bitcoin. So it cannot work in the long run but it sets concepts that 
can be improved. It is maybe version 0.7 or 0.8 now. 

JACOB: This is like David Chaum reinvented. 83 

ANDY: Bitcoin was the most successful attempt to introduce a digital 
currency for the last ten years, I would say. 

JULIAN: They got the balance almost right. I think Bitcoin will continue. 
It's an efficient currency; you can start up an account in ten seconds, 
and to transfer money there is no overhead other than the cost of an 
internet connection and a few minutes of electricity. It's highly compet- 
itive compared to almost any other form of currency transfer. I think it 
will prosper. Look at what happened following several Bitcoin thefts and 
negative follow-up press in the summer of 201 1 that drove the exchange 
rate down to three dollars US. 94 Bitcoin has gradually risen back up to 
twelve dollars. It hasn't climbed up or bounced back suddenly, it has 
climbed up in a gradual curve that seems to show a broad demand for 
the currency. I suspect a lot of the demand is petty drug trading, mail 
order marijuana and so on. 95 But Bitcoin has low overheads as a cur- 
rency. Several ISPs, especially in places that can't get easy credit-card 
services, like the former Soviet Union, are starting to use it. 



99 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



There will be a crackdown if it continues to grow. That will not 
get rid of Bitcoin, because cryptography prevents any simple attack 
via coercive force from working, but the sort of foreign exchange ser- 
vices that convert to and from Bitcoin could be targeted much more 
easily. On the other hand, these exchanges can run anywhere in the 
world, so there are quite a few jurisdictions one has to work through 
before there are no more exchanges, and then the black market has its 
own exchange logic. I think the play that needs to be conducted with 
Bitcoin is to get it adopted by the ISP and internet service industry 
for these little games you buy on Facebook and so on, because it is 
so efficient, and once it is well adopted by a variety of industries they 
will form a lobby to stop it being banned. That's a bit like how cryp- 
tography was adopted. It used to be classified as arms trading, and 
some of us as arms traders, but once it was in browsers and used for 
banking there was a powerful enough lobby to prevent it from being 
banned — although I concede there are moves afoot again. 

JACOB: The problem is that the privacy concerns are wrong. Let's be 
honest here. It's wrong to suggest that the economics of the situa- 
tion are different with the internet than without the internet. When 
I came here and I bought British pounds I had to give up my social 
security number, which is my unique identifier in the United States, 
I had to give up my name, I had to link it to a bank account, I had to 
give them the money. They recorded all the serial numbers and then 
they took all that information and they reported that to the Federal 
Government. So, that's the analogue. It's actually harder to get for- 
eign currencies in the US because we're so far away from everywhere 
else. But there's a historical trend of control with regard to currency 



100 



CYPHERPUNKS 



and it's not just in regard to the internet that we see this control. 
In fact, there are to my understanding ATM machines in banks that 
record the serial numbers of cash and then track them to do flow 
analyses on the cash to see where it has been spent and who has done 
stuff with it. 

If we look at those systems and then we look at the internet, 
they did not improve the privacy as we migrated to the internet — in 
fact, they kept it as bad as it was to begin with. In this way I think 
it's very important to then look at the trends from the world before 
the internet to see where we're headed. What we find is that if you 
have a lot of money you can pay a premium to keep your privacy, 
and if you don't have a lot of money you almost certainly have no 
privacy. And it's worse with the internet. Something like Bitcoin is a 
step in the right direction because when combined with an anony- 
mous communications channel, like Tor for example, it allows you to 
actually send WikiLeaks a Bitcoin over Tor and anyone watching this 
transaction would see a Tor user sending a Bitcoin and you receiving 
it. It's possible to do it — that is much better in some ways than cash. 

JULIAN: We all speak about the privacy of communication and the 
right to publish. That's something that's quite easy to understand — 
it has a long history — and, in fact, journalists love to talk about it 
because they're protecting their own interests. But if we compare that 
value to the value of the privacy and freedom of economic interaction, 
actually every time the CIA sees an economic interaction they can see 
that it's this party from this location to this party in this location, and 
they have a figure to the value and importance of the interaction. So 
isn't the freedom, or privacy, of economic interactions actually more 



101 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



important than the freedom of speech, because economic interactions 
really underpin the whole structure of society? 

JACOB: They're inherently linked. I think you can tell the differ- 
ence between the American and European cypherpunks right here 
because most of the American cypherpunks would say that they are 
exactly the same. Because in a society which has a free market one 
would argue that you put your money where your mouth is. 

JULIAN: Where you put your money is where you put your power. 

JACOB: Exactly. I'm not saying that that is right, that's almost a Right 
attitude towards this, which maybe is not what we want. Maybe we 
want a socially constrained capitalism, for example. 

JULIAN: If we just look from a simple intelligence perspective: You've 
got a 10 million dollar intelligence budget. You can spy on people's 
email interactions or you can have total surveillance of their economic 
interactions. Which one would you prefer? 

ANDY: Well, these days they will say, "Ok, we'll just force the payment 
companies and banks to use the internet, so we have both." And that's 
what they did. So the point is indeed that there is no direct escape 
here. You can do things like use Tor to protect your communication, 
you can encrypt your phone calls, you can do secure messaging. With 
money, it's a lot more complicated and we have these things called 
money laundering laws and so on, and they tell us that drug and ter- 
rorist organizations are abusing the infrastructure to do evil things. 



102 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: It's the Horsemen of the Info-pocalypse. 

ANDY: Actually, I'd be very interested to have more transparency on 
surveillance companies and government spending on these issues. The 
question is what do we buy when we provide total anonymity of only 
the money system? What would actually happen? I think this might 
lead here and there to interesting areas where people may get them- 
selves a little more easy and say, "Well, you know, I can raise my voice, 
I can go to the parliament, but I can also just buy some politicians." 

JEREMIE: You're describing the US, right? 

JACOB: It's not anonymous. 

ANDY: I'm not sure this is limited to the US. In Germany we don't 
actually call it corruption, we call it foundations that buy paintings 
painted by wives of politicians, and so it's in the art trade or other 
areas. So we have better names for it. Maybe in France you call it 
friendship parties and others call it hiring prostitutes. 

JEREMIE: In the US it's particular because the link between the polit- 
ical system and money is so tight. Larry Lessig said, after ten years of 
working on copyright issues, that he gave up on trying to fix copyright 
(he didn't really give up) because he found out that the problem wasn't 
politicians' understanding of what a good copyright policy would be, 
the problem was that there were just too many links to the industrial 
actors that were pushing for a bad copyright regime. 96 So there is a real 
problem here. 



103 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JULIAN: Are you sure it's a problem, Jeremie? Maybe in fact it is a 
good attribute that those industries that are productive. . . 

ANDY: I think the devil's advocate is drinking my whiskey. 

J ACO B: Let's see if he can actually finish this sentence without crack- 
ing up. Troll us, Master Troll. 

JULIAN: Those industries that are productive, that produce wealth 
for the whole society, use a portion of their money in order to make 
sure that they continue to be productive, by knocking out random 
legislation that comes out of political myth-making seeded by hype. 
And the best way to do that is, in fact, to buy Congressmen, to take 
the labor of their productive industry and use it to modify the law — 
so as to keep the productive nature of the industry going. 

JACOB: Wait — I'll get this one. Ready? Ready? Right now, ready? No. 

JULIAN: Why? 

JACOB: There are a couple of reasons but for one, there is a feed- 
back loop that is extremely negative. For example, I believe one of 
the largest political campaign donors in the state of California is the 
prison guard union, and part of the reason for this is because they 
like to lobby for stronger laws, not because they care about the rule 
of law but because there is a job incentive. 97 So, if you see that these 
people are lobbying to create more prisons, to jail more people, to 
have longer sentences, what is it they are effectively doing? What 



104 



CYPHERPUNKS 



they're doing is they're using the benefit that they receive for the 
labor that was actually beneficial — arguably — in order to expand the 
monopoly that the state grants to them. 

JULIAN: So they're just using it for wealth transfer from actual pro- 
ductive industries to industries that are not productive? 

JACOB: You could sum it up that way. 

JULIAN: But maybe that's just a small component. Every system is 
abused, perhaps these free-riders that are just involved in wealth 
transfer are a small element, and in fact the majority of the lobbying, 
the majority of the influence on Congress does actually come from 
productive industries making sure that that the laws continue to 
permit those industries to be productive. 

JACOB: But you can measure that very easily because you can look to 
see which people wish to promote rent-seeking activities, and wish to 
restrict the freedoms of other people to create a situation in which they 
themselves could not have risen to be where they are today. When they 
do those things then you know that something has gone wrong and 
they're just protecting what they have, which they've essentially cre- 
ated through an exploitation — usually by an appeal to emotion where 
they say, "Gosh, stop the terrorist, stop the child pornography, stop the 
money laundering, fight the war on drugs." Maybe those things are all 
totally reasonable in the context in which they're originally presented, 
and usually they are, because generally speaking we think that those 
are bad because there is a serious component in each one of them. 



105 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



ANDY: I'd like to get back to copyright and give you another exam- 
ple — there were serious issues when cars came out. Those who ran 
companies transporting passengers with horses feared that this 
would kill their business, which was true, but maybe it also made 
sense. I was invited to speak to the German movie companies' asso- 
ciation and before my speech there was a professor from a university 
in Berlin who spoke super politely about the evolution of the human 
race and the development of culture, saying that copying thoughts 
and processing them further on is the key thing, just as making 
movies is about taking themes and expressing them in a dramaturgic 
way. After his forty minutes the moderator brashly interrupted him 
and said, "Ok, so after you just said that we should legalize theft, let's 
see what the guy from the Chaos Computer Club has to say." And I 
was thinking, "Wow, what the fuck? If I'm going to speak out, will 
they let me out of here alive?" So some industries just have business 
cases that are not serving evolution. This is selfish, staying on their 
de-evolutionary drive, making it even more monopolistic. When 
cassettes came out they also thought that the record industry was 
going to die. The opposite happened, the record industry exploded. 
The question is what's the policy here? What's the positive way we 
could formulate these things? 

JULIAN: I just wonder whether we couldn't, in fact, standardize the 
actual practice in the United States, and formalize it so you do simply 
buy Senators and buy votes in the Senate. 

JEREMIE: No, no, no, no. 



106 



CYPHERPUNKS 



ANDY: Let's assume we have the money. 

JULIAN: Yes, and that it is all open and there are buyers and each one 
goes to an auction. 

ANDY: But the weapons industry would still have more money. 

JULIAN: No, I think it wouldn't. I actually think the military- industrial 
complex would be relatively marginalized because their ability to oper- 
ate behind closed doors in a system that is not open to general market 
bidding is in fact higher than other industries. 

JACOB: There's a fundamental inequality in the system. 

JEREMIE: From an economic liberal, anti-monopolistic perspective, 
when you say let's let the dominant actors decide what the policy will 
be, I can answer you with the experience of the internet in the last 
fifteen years, where innovation was so-called bottom up, where new 
practices emerged out of nothing, where a couple of guys in a garage 
invented a technology that spread. 

JULIAN: For nearly everything, for Apple, for Google, for YouTube, 
for everything. 

JEREMIE: For everything. Everything that happened on the internet just 
boomed after being unknown a few months or a few years before, so you 
cannot predict what the next innovation will be and the pace of inno- 
vation is so fast that it is much faster than the policy-making process. 



107 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



So when you design a law that has an impact on what the market is today, 
on what the strength relationship between various companies and actors 
is, if you strengthen one that is strong already you may stop a new entrant 
from appearing that would have been more efficient. 

JULIAN: The market has got to be regulated to be free. 

JEREMIE: Of course you have to fight monopolies and you need to 
have a power that is superior to the power of those companies in order 
to punish bad behavior — but my point here is that policy has to adapt 
to society, and not the other way around. We have the impression with 
the copyright wars that the legislator tries to make the whole of soci- 
ety change to adapt to a framework that is defined by Hollywood, say. 
"Ok, what you're doing with your new cultural practice is just morally 
wrong, so if you don't want to stop it then we'll design legal tools to 
make you stop doing what you think is good." This is not the way to 
make good policy. A good policy looks at the world and adapts to it 
in order to correct what is wrong and to enable what is good. I'm con- 
vinced that when you enable the most powerful industrial actors to 
decide what policy should be, you don't go that way. 

ANDY: I'm just trying to positively get us into thinking what would 
be a good policy. What you just formulated is at this stage, for me, a 
little too complicated. I'm trying to simplify a little bit. There is this 
guy called Heinz von Foerster — the godfather of cybernetics — who 
once made a set of rules and one of the rules was, "Always act in a 
way that increases the options." 98 So with policies, technology, what- 
ever, always do what gives you more, not less options. 



108 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JULIAN: Chess strategy as well. 

AN DY: It was mentioned that the increase of privacy on money trans- 
actions might have a negative effect, so we need to think, "The money 
system right now has a specific logic and the question is how do we 
exclude the money system from taking over other areas?" Because 
the money system has the ability — unlike the communication sec- 
tor — to affect and totally limit the options of people in other areas. 
If you can hire contract killers to do specific things, or if you can 
buy weapons and engage in a war with other countries, then you're 
limiting other people's option to live, to act. If I put more money in 
communications then more people have more options. If I put more 
weapons on the market. . . 

JACOB: No — the more you have the ability to surveil, the more you 
have control. 

ANDY: Which is another good argument for restricting the weapons 
market, including telecommunication surveillance technology. 

JACOB: Sure, you want to restrict my ability to sell that, how do 
you do that? How do you restrict my ability to transfer wealth? — 
Also through communications networks. One of the most offensive 
things about the bailouts in the United States — which were offensive 
for a whole bunch of reasons to many people — was that they showed 
that wealth is just a series of bits in a computer system. Some people 
by begging in a very effective way managed to get many of the bits to 
be set high, and then what is the question? Is there value in the sys- 



109 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



tern if you can just cheat the system and get your bits set high? And 
everybody else who is struggling to get along isn't acknowledged as 
even having bits that are worth flipping in the first place." 

ANDY: So what you're saying is we need a totally different economic 
system? Because value today is not attached to economic value. 

JACOB: No, I'm saying there is an economic value. 

ANDY: You can do bad things and generate money with it, and you 
can generate good things and you will not get a cent. 

JACOB: Well no, what I'm saying is you can't decouple the economy 
from communication. I'm not talking about whether or not we need 
a different economic system. I'm not an economist. I'm just going to 
say that there is some value in the communication systems and in 
the freedom of those communications, just as there is value in the 
freedom of actual bartering — I have the right to give you something 
in exchange for your labor, just as I have the right to explain an idea 
and you have the right to tell me what you think of my idea. We can't 
say that the economic system exists in some kind of vacuum. The 
communication system is directly tied together with this, and this is 
part of society 

If we are going to have this reductionist notion of freedom, of the 
three freedoms Julian mentioned, this is obviously tied to freedom of 
movement — you cannot even buy a plane ticket now without using a 
trackable currency, otherwise you're flagged. If you walk into an airport 
and you try to buy a ticket on the same day with cash, you're flagged. 



1 10 



CYPHERPUNKS 



You get extra security searches, you cannot fly without identification 
and if you were to be so unlucky as to buy your plane ticket with a 
credit card they'll log everything about you — from your IP address to 
your browser. I actually have the Freedom of Information Act data for 
my Immigration and Customs Enforcement records from a couple of 
years ago, because I thought someday maybe it would be interesting 
to look at the differences. And sure enough it has Roger Dingledine, 
who bought me a plane ticket for some work thing, his credit card, his 
address where he was when he bought it, the browser that he used and 
everything about that plane ticket was all put together. 

JULIAN: And that went to the US government, it wasn't just kept in 
the commercial processor? 

JACOB: Right. The commercial data was collected, sent to the gov- 
ernment and they were tied together. And the thing that I find to be 
really crazy is that it's essentially the merging of these three things 
you're talking about. It was my right to travel freely, it was my ability 
to buy that plane ticket or for someone else to purchase that plane 
ticket, and it was the ability for me effectively to be able to speak — I 
was going to travel to speak somewhere, and in order to do that I 
had to make compromises in the other two spheres. And in fact it 
impacts my ability to speak, especially when I find out later what 
they have collected and that they've put it together. 



CENSORSHIP 



JULIAN: Jake, can you speak a little bit about the detainment that 
you've had at US airports, and why that has occurred? 

JACOB: They've asserted that it occurs because "I know why." 

J U LI AN : But they don't say? 

ANDY: Can I try to summarize it, because technical security and 
the security of governmental affairs are two things that are totally 
detached. You can have a totally secure technical system and the gov- 
ernment will think it's no good, because they think security is when 
they can look into it, when they can control it, when they can breach 
the technical security. This was not about Jake trying to approach 
planes, to kill anybody, to hijack the plane or whatever. This was 
about his ability to affect governmental affairs by travelling to other 
countries, speaking to people, and spreading ideas. That is the most 
dangerous thing that happens to governments these days — when 
people have better ideas than what their policy is. 



113 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: I totally appreciate you complimenting me there in that 
statement, but I would just like to point out that this is way worse 
than that, because this is the data they collect on everyone. This was 
before I did anything interesting at all; it was merely the fact that 
I was travelling and the systems themselves, the architecture, pro- 
moted this information collection. This is before I was ever stopped 
for anything, it was before I was deported from Lebanon, it was 
before the US government took a special interest in me. 

ANDY: Maybe they forecast it, maybe they saw it earlier than you did. 

JACOB: Of course they did, partially because of collecting this data. 
But they always give me different answers. Usually they say one 
response, which is, uniformly across the board, "Because we can." 
And I say, "Ok, I do not dispute your authority — well, I do dispute 
your authority, I do not dispute it now — I merely wish to know why 
this is happening to me." Now people tell me all the time, "Well, isn't 
it obvious? You work on Tor," or, "You're sitting next to Julian, what 
did you expect?" It's fascinating to me because each of the different 
people that are holding me — usually from the Customs and Bor- 
der Protection and Immigration and Customs Enforcement in the 
United States — will tell me it is because they have the authority to 
do so more than anything else. I've also had them tell me bullshit 
like, "Oh, remember 9/11? That's why," or, "Because we want you 
to answer some questions and this is the place you have the least 
amount of rights, or so we assert." 

And in this situation they'll deny access to a lawyer, they'll 
deny access to a bathroom but they'll give you water, they will 



114 



CYPHERPUNKS 



give you something to drink, like a diuretic, in order to convince 
you that you really want to co-operate in some way. They did this 
to pressure, for political reasons. They asked me questions about 
how I feel about the Iraq War, how I feel about the Afghan War. 
Basically, every step of the way they repeated the tactics of the FBI 
during COINTELPRO (the massive domestic covert operations 
program that ran between 1956 and 1971). For example, they spe- 
cifically tried to assert their authority to change political realities 
in my own life, and to try to pressure me not only to change them, 
but to give them some special access to what's going on in my head. 
And they've seized my property. I'm not really at liberty to dis- 
cuss all of the things that have occurred to me because it's a very 
murky grey area where I don't really know whether or not I'm even 
allowed to talk about them. I'm sure this happened to other people 
but I've never heard of it happening to them. 

I was in the Toronto Pearson airport once while travelling home 
from an event where I was visiting my family I was travelling back 
to Seattle, where I was living at the time, and they detained me, they 
put me in the secondary screening, and then the tertiary screening, 
and then finally into a holding cell. And they held me for so long that 
when I was finally released I missed my flight. But there's a curious 
thing, which is that these pre-detention areas are actually technically 
US soil on Canadian soil, and so they have a rule that says that if 
you miss your flight or it's so long before the next flight, you have to 
leave. So I technically got kicked out of America by being detained so 
long and I had to enter Canada, fly across the country, rent a car, and 
then drive across the border. And when I got to the border they said, 
"How long have you been in Canada?" and I said, "Well, five hours 



115 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



plus the detainment that happened in Toronto," so I had been in 
Canada about eight hours, and they said, "Well, come on in, we're 
going to detain you again." And then they ripped my car apart and 
they took my computer apart and they looked through all this stuff, 
and then they held me. They gave me access to a bathroom within 
half an hour, they were very merciful you could say. And this is 
what they call the border search exception — this kind of behavior 
is because they have the ability, they assert, to do this, and no one 
challenges them about it. 100 

JULIAN: So, this has happened to you, but Chinese people I speak 
to, when they speak about the great firewall of China — in the West 
we talk about this in terms of censorship, that it's blocking Chinese 
citizens from coming out and reading what is said about the Chinese 
government in the West and by Chinese dissidents and by the Falun 
Gong and by the BBC and, to be fair, in actual propaganda about 
China — but their concern is actually not about censorship. Their 
concern is that in order to have internet censorship there must also 
be internet surveillance. In order to check what someone is looking 
at, to see whether it is permitted or denied, you must be seeing it, and 
therefore if you are seeing it you can record it all. And this has had 
a tremendous chilling effect on the Chinese — not that they're being 
censored but that everything that they read is being spied upon and 
recorded. In fact, that's true for all us. This is something that modi- 
fies people, when they are aware of it. It modifies their behavior and 
they become less resolute in complaining about various kinds of 
authorities. 



116 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: That's the wrong answer to that type of influence, though. 
Their harassment of me at borders, for example, is not unique, in 
that every Arab- American, since September 11th and before, has 
had to deal with this. It's just that I refuse to let the privilege of hav- 
ing white skin and a US passport go to waste in this, and I refuse to 
be silent about it because the things that they are doing are wrong, 
and the power that they are using, they are abusing. And we must 
stand up to those things, just in the same way that there are brave 
people in China that stand up to this, like Isaac Mao for example. 101 
He has been working very strongly against this type of censorship 
effectively, because the right answer is not to just give in to this type 
of pressure merely because the government asserts that it has the 
ability to do this. 

JEREMIE: But once again we're talking politics because what you say 
is, basically, that people should stand up for their rights — but people 
should understand why to do so, and then have the ability to com- 
municate between each other to do so. I had the occasion to talk with 
some people from China — and I don't know if they were in some 
position in the state, or if they were selected in order to be able to 
go outside to talk to me — but when talking to them about internet 
censorship I very often had this answer: "Well, it's for the good of the 
People. There is censorship, yes, because if there wasn't censorship 
then there would be extremist behavior, there would be things that 
we would all dislike, and so the government is taking those measures 
in order to make sure that everything goes well." 



1 17 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: That's the same argument for organ harvesting. Don't let 
those organs go to waste! 

J £ REM IE: If you look at the way Chinese censorship is being done, 
you see from the technical perspective that it's one of the most 
advanced systems that exists in the world. 

JACOB: Absolutely. 

J E REM IE: And I've heard that on Weibo — that is the Chinese equiv- 
alent of Twitter — the government has the ability to filter some 
hashtags to make sure they don't leave a selected province. 

JACOB: It's crucial to remember that when people talk about censor- 
ship in Asia they like to talk about it in terms of the "the other" — as 
if it only affects the people in "OverTherelstan." It's very important to 
know that when you search on Google in the United States, they say 
that they have omitted search results because of legal requirements. 
There is a difference between the two — both in how they are imple- 
mented and, of course, in the social reality of the how, the why, and 
the where even — but a big part of that actually is the architecture. 
For example, over the American internet, it's very decentralized — it's 
very hard to do the Chinese-style censorship in the same respect. 

JULIAN: Well, a big chunk of it is Google and you can censor Google. 
There are a load of pages that reference WikiLeaks that are censored 
by Google. 



118 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: Yes, no doubt. And actually since the index itself is free, it's 
possible to do a differential analysis. 

JULIAN: Yes, in theory. 

JACOB: In theory. And in practice there are some people that are 
working on that type of censorship detection by looking at the dif- 
ferences from different perspectives in the world. I think that it is 
important to remember that censorship and surveillance are not 
issues of "other places" — people in the West love to talk about how 
"Iranians and the Chinese and North Koreans need anonymity and 
freedom, but we don't need it here." And by "here," they usually mean 
"in the United States." But actually it is not just oppressive regimes, 
because if you happen to be in the top echelon of any regime it's not 
oppressive to you. But we consider the UK to be a wonderful place; 
generally people think Sweden is a pretty great place, and yet you can 
see that when you fall out of favor with the people in power you don't 
end up in a favorable position. But Julian's still alive, right? So clearly 
that's a symbol that it's a free country — is that right? 

JULIAN: I worked hard to maintain my current position. But maybe 
we should speak about internet censorship in the West. This is very 
interesting. If we go back to 1953 and we look at the great Soviet 
encyclopedia, which was distributed everywhere, that encyclopedia 
sometimes had amendments as politics changed in the Soviet Union. 
In 1953 Beria, the head of the NKVD, the Soviet secret police, died 
and fell out of political favor and so his section, which described 
him in glowing terms, was removed by the encyclopedia authority 



1 19 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



which posted out an amendment that was to be pasted into all of 
those encyclopedias. It was extremely obvious. I'm mentioning this 
example because it was so obvious and so detectable that the attempt 
became part of history. Whereas in the UK we have the Guardian 
and the other major newspapers ripping out stories from their inter- 
net archives in secret without any description. You go to those pages 
now and you try to find them, for example stories on the fraud case 
of the billionaire Nadhmi Auchi, and you see, "Page not found," and 
they have also been removed from the indexes. 

Let me tell you my involvement with the Nadhmi Auchi story. 
In 1990 Iraq invaded Kuwait, and that led to the first Gulf War. The 
Kuwaiti government in exile, and also during its return, needed cash, 
so it started to sell off various assets including several oil refineries 
outside Kuwait. A UK businessman, Nadhmi Auchi, who had immi- 
grated to the UK in the early 1980s from Iraq, where he used to be a 
figure in Saddam Hussein's regime, was a broker in that deal and was 
subsequently accused of being involved in channeling $118 million 
of illegal commissions. That investigation was the largest corruption 
investigation in European postwar history. In 2003 Auchi was con- 
victed of fraud in what was to become known as the Elf Aquitaine 
scandal. Nevertheless, nowadays he has over 200 companies regis- 
tered through his Luxembourg holding outfit, and others through 
Panama. He is involved in post-war Iraqi cellular contracts and 
many other businesses around the world. 102 

In the United States Tony Rezko, a fundraiser for Barack 
Obama's Senate campaign, was a long term pal of Auchi's, who had 
been his financier. Similarly Auchi and Rezko became involved 
with the former Governor of Illinois, Rod Blagojevich. Both Rezko 



120 



CYPHERPUNKS 



and Blagojevich were convicted of corruption, Rezko in 2008 and 
Blagojevich in 2010/11 (after the FBI recorded him in telephone 
intercept trying to sell Obamas former Senate seat). In 2007/8, when 
Obama was running to be the Democrats' presidential candidate, 
the US press started to investigate Obama's connections. They inves- 
tigated Rezko and reported some links in relation to the purchase 
of Barack Obamas house. In 2008, shortly before his trial, Rezko 
received a $3.5 million transfer from Auchi which he didn't report to 
the court, despite being required to — for which he was jailed. So US 
press scrutiny turned to Auchi, and at that moment he instructed UK 
lawyers Carter-Ruck to wage an aggressive campaign on much of the 
2003 reportage about the Elf Aquitaine scandal and his conviction in 
France. This was very successful. He targeted the UK press, and even 
US blogs, and had nearly a dozen articles removed that we know 
about. Most of those articles, including in UK newspaper archives, 
simply disappeared. It was as if they had never even existed. There 
was no, "We have received a legal complaint and decided to remove 
the story." They also disappeared from the indexes. WikiLeaks dug 
these out and republished them. 103 

JACOB: They erase history. 

J U LI AN : History is not only modified, it has ceased to have ever existed. 
It is Orwell's dictum, "He who controls the present controls the past 
and he who controls the past controls the future." It is the undetectable 
erasure of history in the West, and that's just post-publication censor- 
ship. Pre-publication self-censorship is much more extreme but often 
hard to detect. We've seen that with Cablegate as WikiLeaks works 



121 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



with different media partners all over the world, so we can see which 
ones censor our material. 104 

For example the New York Times redacted a cable that said 
that millions of dollars were distributed to covertly influence polit- 
ically connected Libyans via oil companies operating in Libya. 
The cable didn't even name a specific oil company — the New York 
Times simply redacted the phrase "oil services companies." 105 Prob- 
ably the most flagrant was the New York Times' use of a sixty-two- 
page cable about North Koreas missile program, and whether they 
had sold missiles to the Iranians, from which the New York Times 
used two paragraphs in order to argue, in a story, that Iran had 
missiles that could strike Europe, whereas elsewhere in the cable 
just the opposite was argued. 106 

The Guardian redacted a cable about Yulia Tymoshenko, the 
former prime minister of Ukraine, which said that she might be hiding 
her wealth in London. 107 It censored out allegations that the Kazakh- 
stan! elite in general was corrupt — not even a named person — and 
an allegation that both ENI, the Italian energy company operating in 
Kazakhstan, and British Gas were corrupt. 108 Essentially the Guardian 
censored instances where a rich person was accused of something in 
a cable, unless the Guardian had an institutional agenda against that 
rich person. 109 So, for example, in a cable about Bulgarian organized 
crime there was one Russian, and the Guardian it made it look like the 
whole thing was about him, but he was just one person on a long list 
of organizations and individuals associated with Bulgarian organized 
crime. 110 Der Spiegel censored out a paragraph about what Merkel 
was doing — no human rights concern whatsoever, purely political 
concerns about Merkel. 111 There are lots of examples. 112 



122 



CYPHERPUNKS 



ANDY: Our understanding of freedom of information and the free 
flow of information is in some way a very radical new concept if 
you look at planet Earth. I would say it's not much different between 
Europe and other countries. Well, there are countries that have a 
democratic framework, which means you can read and understand 
and maybe even legally fight the censorship infrastructure, but it 
doesn't mean it's not there, while you will have a hard time trying in 
Saudi Arabia or China. 

JULIAN: My experience in the West is that it is just so much more 
sophisticated in the number of layers of indirection and obfusca- 
tion about what is actually happening. These layers are there to give 
deniability to the censorship that is occurring. You can think about 
censorship as a pyramid. This pyramid only has its tip sticking out 
of the sand, and that is by intention. The tip is public — libel suits, 
murders of journalists, cameras being snatched by the military, and 
so on — publicly declared censorship. But that is the smallest com- 
ponent. Under the tip, the next layer is all those people who don't 
want to be at the tip, who engage in self-censorship to not end up 
there. Then the next layer is all the forms of economic inducement 
or patronage inducement that are given to people to write about one 
thing or another. The next layer down is raw economy — what it is 
economic to write about, even if you don't include the economic fac- 
tors from higher up the pyramid. Then the next layer is the prejudice 
of readers who only have a certain level of education, so therefore on 
one hand they are easy to manipulate with false information, and on 
the other hand you can't even tell them something sophisticated that 
is true. The last layer is distribution — for example, some people just 



123 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



don't have access to information in a particular language. So that is 
the censorship pyramid. What the Guardian is doing with its Cable- 
gate redactions is in the second layer. 

Now, such censorship is deniable because it either it takes place 
out of the light, or because there is no instruction to censor a par- 
ticular claim. Journalists are rarely instructed, "Don't print anything 
about that," or, "Don't print that fact." Rather they understand that 
they are expected to because they understand the interests of those 
they wish to placate or grow close to. If you behave you'll be patted 
on the head and rewarded, and if you don't behave then you won't. 
It's that simple. I'm often fond of making this example: the obvious 
censorship that occurred in the Soviet Union, the censorship that 
was propagandized about so much in the West — jackboots coming 
for journalists in the middle of the night to take them from their 
homes — has just been shifted by twelve hours. Now we wait for the 
day and take homes from journalists, as they fall out of patronage 
and are unable to service their debts. Journalists are taken from their 
homes by taking homes from the journalists. Western societies spe- 
cialize in laundering censorship and structuring the affairs of the 
powerful such that any remaining public speech that gets through 
has a hard time affecting the true power relationships of a highly 
fiscalized society, because such relationships are hidden in layers of 
complexity and secrecy. 

ANDY: Jeremie mentioned the pedo-Nazis. 

JACOB: We're back to the pedo-Nazis again. 



124 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JEREMIE: Two Horsemen in one. 

ANDY: The pedo-Nazis pretty well summarized the German, or 
maybe part of the European censoring arguments. Germany didn't 
want any hate speech-like content on the internet due to its history 
and, of course, if you tell people you need to restrict the internet 
because of pedophiles then you will be able to do anything. Also, 
there was an internal working paper of the European Commission 
about data retention that argued, "We should talk more about child 
pornography and then people will be in favor." 113 

JULIAN: Can you speak to this a little bit? That if we are to censor 
just one thing, say just child pornography, then in order to censor 
child pornography from people seeing it we need to surveil every- 
thing that everyone is doing. We need to build that infrastructure. 
We need to build a bulk spying and censorship system to censor just 
one thing. 

AN DY: It's in the detail of the mechanics — the so-called pre- censorship 
system in Germany obliges you to name the legally responsible person 
for whatever you publish. So, roughly, if you publish something, be it 
on a piece of paper or on the internet, without saying who is legally 
responsible for the content, you already violate the law. This means 
that you allocate the responsibility and if someone violates the law by 
distributing, let's say child porn or hate speech, you could just say, "Ok, 
we look at where that guy is located and we catch him and we get the 
stuff off of the net." 



125 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JULIAN: That is we censor the publisher instead of censoring the 
reader. 

ANDY: Yes. And this is watching specific things. I could agree that 
not everything needs to be available at all times because if I look at 
hate speech issues there are sometimes things with private addresses 
of people and so on that might lead to situations I'm not in favor of. 

JULIAN: But Andy, this is such a German thing. In order to do that, 
in order to determine what's going to be acceptable and what's not 
you have to have a committee, you have to have appointments to 
that committee, you have to have a process of appointments to that 
committee... 

ANDY: Yes, we have all that bullshit. The German killings in the 
Second World War — everything the Nazis did, every property they 
seized, they gave a receipt, they made a list. It was all bureaucratic 
acts. You can say that Germans unjustifiably killed a lot of people — 
that's true — but they did it in a bureaucratic manner. That's Germany. 

JULIAN: If you have someone deciding what should be censored and 
what should not then you have to have two things. First of all, you 
have to build a technical architecture to do the censorship. You have 
to build a nationwide censorship machine to do it effectively. And 
then secondly, you have to have a committee and a bureaucracy to 
censor. And that committee inherently has to be secret because it's 
completely useless unless it is secret and therefore you have secret 
justice. 



126 



CYPHERPUNKS 



ANDY: You know what? We have one good principle in Germany. 
JACOB: Just the one? 

ANDY: The principle is that if it is unrealistic for a law to be applied, 
then it shouldn't be there. If a law doesn't make sense, like if you forbid 
windmills or whatever, then we say, "Hey, come on, forget it." We here 
are inspired by the internet as we knew it when it was growing up, by 
the free flow of information, in the sense of free as in unlimited, as 
in not blocked, not censored, not filtered. So if we apply our under- 
standing of the free flow of information to planet Earth — and it has 
been roughly applied to planet Earth — we see, of course, the govern- 
ments being affected by it and the way power has been applied and 
the way censorship has been run, be it pre-censorship, post-censorship 
or whatever censorship. We have all learned about these complicated 
conflicts that arise. The question is what is our concept of govern- 
ment or the future of a Post-Governmental Organization — maybe 
WikiLeaks is the first or one of the first PGOs — because I'm not sure 
governments are the right answer to all the problems on this planet, like 
environmental issues. 

JULIAN: The governments are not sure either, of the barrier between 
what is government or not. It's fuzzed out now. Governments occupy 
space, but WikiLeaks occupies part of the space of the internet. 
Internet space is embedded in real space, but the degree of com- 
plexity between the embedded object and the embedding means that 
it's not easy for the embedding to tell that the embedded object is 
even part of it. So that's why we have this sense of a cyberspace — that 



127 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



it is actually some other realm that exists somewhere — it's because 
of the degree of its indirection, complexity and universality. When 
you read some file on the internet in one location it's the same as 
reading it in another location or in the future — that's its universality. 
So to that degree, as an organization that occupies cyberspace and 
is adept at moving its information around the underlying embed- 
dings, maybe we are a post-state organization because of the lack of 
geographic control. 

I don't want to take this analogy too far, because I am under 
house arrest. The coercive force of states obviously applies to all our 
people, wherever they are known. But the rest of the press likes to say 
we're a stateless media organization and they are quite right about 
the importance of statelessness. I always used to say, "Well what 
do you think Newscorp is? It's a big multinational." But nonethe- 
less, Newscorp is structured in such a way that you can get at its key 
components, and that's why it has had so much trouble here in the 
UK with the phone-hacking scandal, and why it is trying so hard to 
suck up to the US establishment. But if an organization's assets are 
primarily its information, then it can be transnational in a way that 
is quite hard to stop as a result of cryptography. There is a reason a 
financial blockade was erected against us — our other organizational 
facets are harder to suppress. 114 

JACOB: If we're talking about it in Utopian terms, we have to actually 
go back a little bit further. So, you asked me about the harassment 
I received, you asked about censorship in the West and I talked ear- 
lier about Obama's targeted killing program, which they say is lawful 
because there is a process, therefore it counts as due process. 



128 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JULIAN: Well, a secret process. 

JACOB: We can also tie this back to John Gilmore. One of John 
Gilmore's lawsuits about his ability to travel anonymously in the 
United States resulted in the court literally saying, "Look, we're 
going to consult with the law, which is secret. We will read it and 
we will find out when we read this secret law whether or not you 
are allowed to do the thing that you are allowed to do." And they 
found when they read the secret law that, in fact, he was allowed 
to do it, because what the secret law said did not restrict him. He 
never learned what the secret law was at all and later they changed 
the US Transportation Security Administration and Department 
of Homeland Security policies in response to him winning his law- 
suit, because it turns out the secret law was not restrictive enough 
in this way. 115 

JULIAN: So they made it more restrictive? 

JACOB: Effectively, through enabling legislation of the bureaucracy. 
But it's important to note that the targeted assassination program, 
the harassment that people face at borders, the censorship that we 
find online, the censorship that corporations perform at the behest 
of a government or at the behest of a corporation, these things all tie 
back together. And what it really comes down to is that the state has 
too much power at each of the places that we see these things come 
out. This is because the power has concentrated in these areas and it 
has attracted people that abuse it, or that push for its use. And even 
if there are sometimes legitimate cases, what we see is that the world 



129 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



would be better off if there was not that centralization, if there was 
not the tendency towards authoritarianism. 

The West is not in any way special with regard to this, because 
it turns out that if you have a czar of cyber-security, well, that's 
not so different from a tsar that was in the internal security forces 
of another nation fifty years ago. We're building the same kind of 
authoritarian control structures, which will attract people to abuse 
them, and that's something that we try to pretend is different in the 
West. It's not different in the West because there's a continuum of 
governance, which is authoritarianism to libertarianism. I don't 
mean it in the American political party sense, but in this sense: 
on that continuum, the United States is very far from the USSR in 
many, many ways but it's a lot closer to the USSR than Christiania 
is, the autonomous neighborhood in the heart of Copenhagen, in 
Denmark. 116 And it is even further, I think, from a potential Uto- 
pian world if we went and created a brand new colony on Mars. We 
would want to move what we might build on Mars as far away from 
totalitarianism and authoritarianism as we could. These are failings 
when we don't have that. 

j£r£M!E: Once again, all those topics are bound together. When we 
talk about concentrating power we once again talk about architecture. 
And when we talk about internet censorship, it is about centralizing 
the power to determine what people may be able to access or not, and 
whether government censorship or also private-owned censorship is 
undue power. We have this example: our website laquadrature.net got 
censored in the UKby Orange UK for several weeks. It was among a list of 
websites that Orange was denying to those less than eighteen years old. 



130 



CYPHERPUNKS 



Maybe we mentioned the term child pornography while we were 
opposing that type of legislation, or maybe they just disliked us because 
we oppose their policy against net neutrality, as we advocate for a law 
to ban them from discriminating their users' communications. 117 We 
will never know. But we have a private actor here that, as a service, was 
offering to remove from people the ability to access information on 
the internet. I see a major risk here beyond the power we give to either 
Orange or the Government of China or whoever. 

JACOB: Clarification — when you say private in the UK, do you mean 
that they actually own every line, every fiber connection and every- 
thing, or do they use some of the state's resources? How were the 
airwaves licensed? There's no state involvement at all? They have no 
duty of care? 

JEREMIE: There is licensing. Whether it's government or company, 
they are changing the architecture of the internet from one universal 
network to a Balkanization of small sub-networks. But what we are 
discussing since the beginning are all global issues, whether we're 
talking of the financial system going awry, whether we're talking of 
corruption, whether we're talking about geopolitics or energy or the 
environment. All of these are global problems that mankind is fac- 
ing today and we still have one global tool between our hands that 
enables better communication, better sharing of knowledge, better 
participation in political and democratic processes. What I suspect 
is that a global universal internet is the only tool we have to address 
those global issues and that is why this fight for a free internet is the 
central fight that we all here have a responsibility to fight. 



131 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



ANDY: I totally agree that we need to ensure that the internet is 
understood as a universal network with free flow of information; 
that we need to not only define that very well, but also to name those 
companies and those service providers who provide something they 
call internet which is actually something totally different. But I think 
we have not answered the key question beyond this filtering thing. 
I want to give you an example of what I think we need to answer. 
Some years ago, about ten years ago, we protested against Siemens 
providing so-called smart filter software. Siemens is one of the big- 
gest telcos in Germany and a provider of intelligence software. And 
they actually sold this filtering system to companies so that, for exam- 
ple, employees couldn't look at the site of the trade unions to inform 
themselves of their labor rights and so on. But they also blocked the 
Chaos Computer Club site which made us upset. They designated 
it as "criminal content" or something, for which we brought legal 
action. But at an exhibition we decided to have a huge protest meet- 
ing and to surround Siemens' booths and filter the people coming 
in and out. The funny thing was that we announced it on our site 
to attract as many people as possible through the internet, and the 
people in the Siemens booth had no fucking clue because they also 
used the filter software so they couldn't read the warning that was 
obviously out there. 

JULIAN: The Pentagon set up a filtering system so that any email sent 
to the Pentagon with the word WikiLeaks in it would be filtered. And 
so in the case of Bradley Manning, the prosecution, in attempting to 
prosecute the case, of course, was mailing people outside the mili- 
tary about "WikiLeaks," but they never saw the replies because they 



132 



CYPHERPUNKS 



had the word "WikiLeaks" in them. 118 The national security state 
may eat itself yet. 

ANDY: Which brings us back to the really basic question: is there 
something such as negative-effecting information? So, from a society 
point of view, do we want a censored internet because it's better for 
society or not? And even if we talk about child pornography you 
could argue, "Wait a moment, this child pornography highlights a 
problem, that is the abuse of children, and in order to solve the prob- 
lem we need to know the problem." 

JACOB: So it provides evidence for the crime. 

JULIAN: Well, no it provides a lobby. 

AN DY: That would be the most radical approach but if we talk about 
Nazis or whatever, you still have to say what we're talking about. 
People who have family will ask themselves: "Well, isn't it better for 
society to filter the bad things out so that we stick to the good things, 
or is that not limiting our ability to view the problems and manage 
them and handle them and take care of them?" 

j£r£M!E: I think the solution is always another one than censor- 
ship. When we talk about child pornography we shouldn't even use 
the word pornography — it is a representation of crime scenes of 
child abuse. One thing to do is to go to the servers, to disable the 
servers, to identify the people who uploaded the content in order 
to identify the people who produced the content, who abused the 



133 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



children in the first place. And whenever there is a network of 
people, a commercial network and so on, go and arrest the people. 
And when we pass laws — and we have one in France where you have 
an administrative authority from the Ministry of Interior that decides 
which websites will be blocked — we remove an incentive to the inves- 
tigative services to go and find the people who do the bad stuff by 
saying, "Oh, we just remove the access to the bad stuff," like we put a 
hand in front of the eyes of someone looking at the problem, there- 
fore we solved the problem. So, just from that perspective, I think it 
is enough to describe it like this — where we all agree that we should 
remove those images from the internet. 

JACOB: I'm sorry, I'm squirming over here. It's so frustrating to hear 
the argument that you're making. I want to throw up, because what 
you just did, is you said, "I want to use my position of power to assert 
my authority over other people, I want to erase history." Maybe I'm 
an extremist in this case — and in many other cases, I'm sure — but I'm 
going to go out on a limb here. This is actually an example of where 
erasing history does a disservice. It turns out that with the internet we 
learned that there's an epidemic in society of child abuse. That's what 
we learned with this child pornography issue — I think it's better to call 
it child exploitation — we saw evidence of this. Covering it up, erasing 
it, is, I think, a travesty because, in fact, you can learn so much about 
society as a whole. For example, you can learn — and I'm obviously 
never going to have a career in politics after I finish this sentence, but 
just to be clear about this — you learn, for example, who is producing it, 
and you learn about the people that are victimized. It is impossible for 
people to ignore the problem. It means that you have to start searching 



134 



CYPHERPUNKS 



out the cause that creates this, which is the exploiters of the children. 
Ironically some surveillance technology might be useful here in facial 
recognition of people and by looking at the metadata in the images. 
Erasing that, making sure that we live in a world where it's possible 
to erase some stuff and not other stuff, creating these administrative 
bodies for censorship and for policing — that's a slippery slope which, 
as we have seen, has turned directly to copyright, it has turned to many 
other systems. 

Just because it is a noble cause to go after that, maybe we should 
not take the easy way out, maybe in fact we should try to solve 
crimes, maybe in fact we should try to help those that are victimized, 
even though there is a cost to that kind of helping. Maybe instead 
of ignoring the problem, we should look at the fact that society as 
a whole has this big problem and it manifests on the internet in a 
particular way. 

It's like, for example, how when Polaroid built the Swinger cam- 
era (this instant camera for taking pictures) people started to take 
abusive pictures with those as well. But the answer is not to destroy 
a medium, or to police that medium. It is when you find evidence 
to prosecute the crimes that the medium has documented. It is not 
to weaken that medium, it is not to cripple society as a whole over 
this thing. Because here we talk about child pornographers, let's talk 
about the police. The police on a regular basis in many countries 
abuse people. There are probably more abusive cops on the internet 
than there are child pornographers on the internet. 

JULIAN: There are almost certainly more. 



135 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JACOB: We know there's "n" number of policemen in the world and 
we know there's "x" number of those policemen that have commit- 
ted ethical violations — usually violent violations. If we look at just 
the Occupy movement, for example, we see this. Shall we censor the 
internet because we know some cops are bad? Shall we cripple the 
police's ability to do good policing work? 

JULIAN: Well, there is a question about re-victimization, which is 
where the child later on, or as an adult, or its social contacts, see the 
child abuse images again. 

JACOB: As long as those cops are online, I am being re-victimized. 

JULIAN: You could say seeing an image of you being beaten by a 
policeman is re-victimization. I would say that the protection of the 
integrity of the history of what actually happened in our world is 
more important; that re-victimization does occur, but nonetheless 
to set up a censorship regime which is capable of removing chunks 
of history means that we cannot address the problem because we 
can't see what the problem is. In the 1990s I acted in an advisory 
capacity on internet matters to pedophile-busting cops in Australia, 
the Victorian Child Exploitation Unit. Those cops were not happy 
about filtering systems, because when people can't see that there's 
child pornography on the internet it removes the lobby that ensures 
that the cops have the funds to stop the abuse of children. 

J £ REM IE: The point on which we agree — I think it's the most import- 
ant one — is that in the end it's the individual responsibility of the 



136 



CYPHERPUNKS 



people who do the content, the child abuse material and things like 
that, that really matters and on which cops should work. 

JACOB: We don't agree. That's not what I said. 

JULIAN: No, Jeremie is talking about doing, not publishing — there's 
a difference. 

JACOB: The production of the content is not the issue, actually. Just 
a minor clarification — if, for example, you have abused a child and 
Andy took a picture of this as proof, I don't think Andy should be 
prosecuted. 

JEREMIE: No, it's the people who abuse. Come on, it's aiding and 
abetting. 

ANDY: But some people abuse the child to produce the pictures, 
right? 

JACOB: Of course they do. 

ANDY: There might also be an economic aspect involved here. 

JACOB: I agree with that entirely, I'm making a distinction here, 
which is to say that if the content itself is a historical record which 
is evidence of a crime, it is evidence of a very serious crime, and we 
should never lose sight of the fact that there is re-victimization, but 



137 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



there is the original victimization and that is actually the core issue, 
whether or not there are pictures of it. 

J £ REM IE: Of course. That's what I mean. 

JACOB: Whether or not there are pictures is almost irrelevant. When 
there are pictures, it is very important to remember that you have to 
keep your eye on the prize, and that the goal is to actually stop the 
harm, stop the abuse. A big part of that is making sure that there is 
evidence and that there is the incentive for the people with the right 
tools to solve those crimes. That, I think, is incredibly important, and 
people really lose sight of that because the easy thing to do is to pre- 
tend that it doesn't exist, and then to stop it and say that has stopped 
the abuse. And it hasn't. 

ANDY: And the trouble is that right now a lot of people will obvi- 
ously favor the easy solution because it's very inconvenient to look 
at what's really going on in society. I think you do have a chance 
to handle a political problem because you're not trying to make a 
policy that ignores the problem or makes it invisible. In a way this 
may be cyber politics, but this is also a question of how a society 
handles issues, and I do have strong doubts that there is something 
such as information that does harm directly. It has to do with the 
ability to filter, of course, and it's also true that I don't want to see all 
the pictures that are available on the internet. There are some that I 
really find disgusting and distracting but the same is true for the next 
video store, showing movies that are fictional and ugly. So, the ques- 
tion is do I have the ability to handle what I'm seeing and what I'm 



138 



CYPHERPUNKS 



processing and what I'm reading? And that is the filtering approach. 
Actually, Wau Holland, the founder of Chaos Computer Club, said 
something funny: "You know, filtering should be handled in the end 
user, and in the end device of the end user." 119 

J U LI AN : So filtering should be done by the people who receive infor- 
mation. 

ANDY: It should be done here. Here! [Pointing to his head] 
JULIAN: In the brain. 

ANDY: In the end device of the end user, that's this thing you have 
between your ears. That's where you should filter and it shouldn't 
be done by the government on behalf of the people. If the people 
don't want to see things, well, they don't have to, and you do have the 
requirement these days to filter a lot of things anyhow. 



139 



PRIVACY FOR THE WEAK, TRANSPARENCY 
FOR THE POWERFUL 



JULIAN: Andy, I spoke recently with the president of Tunisia and 
I asked him about what was going to happen to the intelligence 
records from the rule of the dictator Ben Ali — the equivalent of the 
Stasi archives of Tunisia — and he said that while these were very 
interesting, the intelligence agencies are a problem, they are danger- 
ous, and he would have to knock them off one by one. But in rela- 
tion to these archives, he thought it best for the cohesion of Tunisian 
society that they all be kept secret so there wasn't a blame game. You 
were a young man during the fall of the Stasi in East Germany, can 
you speak a little bit about the Stasi archives, and what do you think 
about this opening up of security archives? 

ANDY: Germany probably has the most well-documented intelli- 
gence agency on the planet, or one of them. All the documents from 
the East German Staatssicherheit — all the handbooks, procedural 
papers, training documents, internal studies — are roughly public. 
Roughly means that not all of them are easy to access but a lot of 
them are, and the government has created an agency to take care of 
the records so German citizens also have the right to view their own 
Stasi files. 



141 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



JULIAN: The German government created the BStU (the Bundes- 
beauftragte fur die Stasi-Unterlagen), this big Stasi archives file 
distributor. 

ANDY: Yes, and journalists can apply so-called research inquiries, 
which is maybe comparable to freedom of information requests, to 
allow them to study matters. And there are lots of books, and also 
handbooks of strategic behavioral learning of how the Stasi applied 
this and that. Actually, I think this is a very good thing to learn from. 
I can understand it is a bit too much to expect the Tunisians to pub- 
lish all the personal records that the former intelligence agency made 
because the president — the current president — will have to judge 
about his own records here, and also those of his allies and so on. 
These intelligence agencies don't respect privacy so you will have 
personal records of your sexual matters, your telecommunications, 
your money transfers, of everything you have done, which you might 
not want to have disclosed. 

JULIAN: Did you follow the situation with the Amn El Dawla in 
Egypt, the domestic state security? Thousands of people went in, 
they looted the archives as the Amn El Dawla tried to burn them and 
destroy them and dump them in the garbage, and lots of material 
came out and was spread around the place. You could buy a record 
for $2 in a local market and upload it. It hasn't destroyed Egyptian 
society. 

ANDY: No, I'm just saying that I do have a bit of an understanding that 
people don't want their personal records to be released. I can understand 



142 



CYPHERPUNKS 



that, if I was living in a country where forty years of intelligence was kept 
about me and every time I go to the loo it is being recorded. 

JULIAN: But there's cost-benefit analysis, right? From my perspective, 
once a rat, always a rat. 

AN DY: Right, but the hacker ethics argument, roughly, is to use public 
information and protect private information or data, and I do think 
that if we're advocating for privacy — and we have very good reasons 
to do so — we shouldn't just say there's a balance of things here. We 
can distinguish. It's not that we have to put it all on the public. 

JACOB: But there's a benefit to that secrecy that is asymmetric. Let's 
take a step back. You argue essentially from a completely flawed point, 
which is this notion that data is private when it is limited, and that's 
just not true. For example, in my country if a million people have a 
security clearance and are allowed to access that private data. . . 

JULIAN: 4.3 million... 

JACOB: How can you call that data private? The problem is that it is 
not truly 100 per cent secret from every person on the planet. 

JULIAN: It's secret from the powerless and to the powerful. 

AN DY: Yes, you're right. But if we want to open the archive entirely. . . 

JULIAN: It has happened in some European countries. 



143 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



ANDY: No. I don't know a single country where all the records have 
been disclosed. 

JULIAN: To a greater extent than Germany, records were released, in 
Poland for example. 

ANDY: That might be. What has happened actually, the bad side of 
this deal Germany has done, is that they used former officers of the 
East German State Security in order for the Stasi to administer not 
only the Stasi records but also part of the so-called "New Germany," 
the unified former Eastern part. There's this interesting story about a 
company winning the public tender to clean the building where the 
records were kept. That company won the tender just because they 
were the cheapest bidder for the same service that other companies 
bid for. After six years the organization keeping the records found 
out that they had hired a company built up by the former Eastern 
intelligence to clean their own records. 

JEREMIE: There was a report on that on WikiLeaks. I read it. It was 
great. 120 

ANDY: WikiLeaks published the report about exactly that, so you are 
right that once these records are created and they are in the hands of 
evil people it is hard to declare privacy. 

JULIAN: We can go to a broader issue, though. The internet has led to 
an explosion of the amount of information that is available to the pub- 
lic — it's just extraordinary. The educative function is extraordinary. 



144 



CYPHERPUNKS 



On the other hand, people talk about WildLeaks and they say, "Look, 
all that private government information is now public, the govern- 
ment cant keep anything secret." I say this is rubbish. I say that 
WikiLeaks is the shadow of a shadow. In fact, that we have produced 
over a million words of information and given it to the public is a 
function of the enormous explosion in the amount of secret material 
out there. And, in fact, powerful groups have such a vast amount of 
secret material now that it dwarfs the amount of publicly available 
material, and the operations of WikiLeaks are just a percentage frac- 
tion of this privately held material. When you look at this balance 
between powerful insiders knowing every credit card transaction in 
the world on the one hand, and on the other hand people being able 
to Google and search for the blogs of the world and people's com- 
ments, how do you see this balance? 

ANDY: I could argue that it is good if all these records get disclosed 
because people will learn that if they use their credit card they leave 
a trace. Some people, if we explain it to them, will find this very hard 
to understand and very abstract. The moment they read their own 
records they will understand. 

J U LI AN : If you get your Facebook record, which has 800 MB of infor- 
mation about you. 

ANDY: I know that after the fall of the Eastern bloc, the German Chan- 
cellor Helmut Kohl wanted to unify Germany and the Americans made 
a condition within the so-called 2+4 talks. They said they wanted to still 
keep the German telecommunications under their control, under their 



145 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



surveillance, and Kohl thought it was not important because he did 
not understand what telecommunications surveillance is. I met some- 
one from his office team and they said they were really upset about this 
and they finally organized to have, like, 8,000 pages of transcripts of his 
phone calls that the Stasi had made rolled into his office on two small 
caddies. And he said, "Hey, what the fuck is that?" They said, "Oh, that's 
your phone calls in the last ten years, including the ones with your girl- 
friends and your wife and your secretary and so on." So they made him 
understand what telecommunication interception is. And indeed these 
records from this intelligence do help people to understand what the 
intelligence is doing. So we could argue for full disclosure and if we were 
to vote on that now, I wouldn't be sure if I would really oppose it. 

JULIAN: I don't want to talk about that so much, as obviously there 
are cases where if you're investigating the mafia, during the period 
of investigation you should keep the record secret. There are circum- 
stances where this could be seen as legitimate. I'm not saying that as 
a policy it's legitimate; I'm saying that it's politically inevitable. There 
are such politically cogent demands for it — like, "these guys have 
murdered before, they're plotting another murder" — that regardless 
of whether you think that interception should be available or not, 
it's going to happen. You can't win that political fight. But this kind 
of tactical surveillance has the benefit that it can be partly regulated 
and the harm can be confined to a minimum number of people. 
When tactical interception is used for law enforcement (as opposed 
to intelligence) often it is part of evidence collection. The evidence 
ends up in court cases, and therefore it ends up public. So you have 
some oversight, at least some of the time, of what's going on. And you 



146 



CYPHERPUNKS 



can interrogate people on the stand about how that information was 
collected and why we should assume it was valid. You can keep an eye 
on it. But regulation of strategic interception is completely absurd. 
It is, by definition, intercepting everyone, so what legislation are we 
going to apply if your starting premise is to intercept everyone? 

JEREMIE: This debate about full disclosure makes me think of the 
group known as LulzSec, who released 70 million records from 
Sony — all the users' data from Sony — and you could see all the 
addresses, email addresses and passwords. I think there were even 
credit card details from 70 million users. As a fundamental rights 
activist I thought, "Wow, there is something wrong here if to prove 
your point or to have fun you disclose people's personal data." 
I was very uncomfortable with seeing people's email addresses on 
the record. In a way, I thought those people were having fun with 
computer security, and what they were demonstrating is that a 
company as notorious and powerful as Sony wasn't able to keep its 
users' secrets secret, and having those 70 million users search in 
a search engine for their email address or for their name and find 
this record would make them instantly realize, "Oh wow, what did 
I do when I disclosed this data to Sony? What does it mean to give 
personal data to a company?" 

JACOB: Then they shoot the messenger. 



147 



RATS IN THE OPERA HOUSE 



JULIAN: We've gone through all these pessimistic scenarios, so now 
I want to look at a potential Utopian scenario. We have the radi- 
calization of internet youth, and now internet youth is approaching 
the majority of youth. On the other hand, we have some desperate 
attempts at anonymization and freedom of publication, freedom 
from censorship — we have a vast array of state and private sector 
interactions which are fighting against that — but let's assume that we 
take the most positive trajectory. What does it look like? 

JACOB: I think we need the right to read and the right to speak freely 
without exception for every single person, not one single human 
being excepted, no exceptions whatsoever, to misquote Bill Hicks. 121 
He talked about this with regard to education, clothing and food, 
but that's really what it comes down to: everyone has the right to 
read, everyone has the right to speak freely. In that comes a right 
to anonymous speech, the ability to be able to pay people in a way 
where there is no interference from third parties, the ability to travel 
freely, the ability to correct data about you that is in systems. To have 
transparency and accountability for any systems where we see any 
sort of agency. 



149 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



ANDY: I would add the thought that with the increase of information 
processing systems and the network side of it, and with the availabil- 
ity of tools like Tor and encryption and so on, the amount of data 
that can be suppressed is pretty low, meaning that governments need 
to just do that and they know it. They know that acting in secret these 
days just means acting for a matter of time in secret, it will be subject 
to public record sooner or later, and this is a good thing. This changes 
the way they act. This means they know there is accountability. This 
also means they actually force whistleblowing inside processes, like 
in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requiring companies which are registered 
in the US stock markets to have a whistleblower infrastructure, so 
that people who need to report criminal or other misbehavior by 
their superiors have a way to report it without being affected directly 
by those they are reporting on. 122 So this is a good thing and this will 
bring more sustainable processes in the long term. 

JEREMIE: Adding to what Jake just said, I think we must make it 
clear for everyone that a free, open and universal internet is prob- 
ably the most important tool that we have to address the global 
issues that are at stake, that protecting it is probably one of the most 
essential tasks that our generation has between its hands, and that 
when somebody somewhere — whether it's a government or a com- 
pany — restricts some people's ability to access the universal internet, 
it is the whole internet that is affected. It's the whole of humanity 
that is being restricted. As we are witnessing that we can collectively 
increase the political cost of taking this decision, all of the citizens 
accessing the free internet can deter that behavior. We are beginning 
to see that as network citizens we have power in political decisions 



150 



CYPHERPUNKS 



and we can make our elected representatives and our governments 
more accountable for what they do when they make bad decisions 
that affect our fundamental freedoms and that affect a free global 
universal internet. 

So I think we should practice that. We should continue to share 
knowledge about how to do it. We should continue to improve our 
ways of action, the way we exchange tactics about going to the par- 
liament, about exposing what the politicians are doing, about expos- 
ing the influence of industry lobbies on the policy-making process. 
We should continue to build tools to make citizens more able to 
build their own decentralized encrypted infrastructures, to own 
their communication infrastructure. We should promote these ideas 
to the whole of society as a way to build a better world and we are 
beginning to do it — we should just continue. 

J U LI AN : Jake, if you look at people like Evgeny Morozov's description 
of the problems in the internet, these issues were foreshadowed long 
ago by the cypherpunks. 123 It wasn't a view that one should simply 
complain about the burgeoning surveillance state and so on, but that 
we can, in fact, must build the tools of a new democracy. We can 
actually build them with our minds, distribute them to other people 
and engage in collective defense. Technology and science is not neu- 
tral. There are particular forms of technology that can give us these 
fundamental rights and freedoms that many people have aspired to 
for so long. 

JACOB: Absolutely. The key thing I think that people should walk away 
with — especially if there's some sixteen-year-old or eighteen-year-old 



151 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



person that wishes they could make the world a better place — is that 
nobody sitting here and nobody anywhere in the world was born 
with the accomplishments that they later have on their gravestone. 
We all build alternatives. Everybody here has built alternatives and 
everyone, especially with the internet, is empowered to do that for the 
context in which they exist. And it is not that they have a duty to do 
it, but it is that if they wish to do this, they can. And if they do that, 
they will impact many people, especially with regard to the internet. 
Building those alternatives has an amplification, a magnification. 

JULIAN: So, just for you, if you build something you can give it to a 
billion people to use. 

JACOB: Or if you participate in building an anonymity network — 
like the Tor network for example — you help to build the alternative 
of anonymous communication where previously it did not exist. 

J E REM IE: It's about sharing that knowledge freely and enabling com- 
munication channels for knowledge to flow freely, this is what you 
are doing. Tor is free software, it is as widely spread as it is today 
because we embed that notion of freedom in the way we build alter- 
natives and build technology and build models. 

JACOB: We need free software for a free world, and we need free and 
open hardware. 

JULIAN: But by free you mean unconstrained, people can muck 
about with the internals, they can see how it operates? 



152 



CYPHERPUNKS 



JACOB: Absolutely. We need software that is as free as laws in a 
democracy, where everyone is able to study it, to change it, to be able 
to really understand it and to ensure that it does what they wish that 
it would do. Free Software, Free and Open Hardware. 124 

JULIAN: They had this notion from the cypherpunks that "code is 
law." 

JEREMIE: That's from Larry Lessig. 

JULIAN: On the internet what you can do is defined by what pro- 
grams exist, what programs run, and therefore code is law. 

JACOB: Absolutely, and what that means is that you can build alter- 
natives, especially in terms of programming but even in terms of 3D 
printing or social things like hacker spaces that exist. 125 You can help 
to build alternatives and the key thing is to drive them home into a 
normalization process, one where people become socially very used 
to being able to build their own three-dimensional objects, to being 
able to modify their own software, and where they are aware that if 
someone blocks them from doing that then whoever is doing the 
blocking isn't providing internet access, they are providing a filternet 
or a censornet, and, in fact, they are violating their duty of care. 

That's what every single one of us has done with our lives and 
people should know that they have the ability to do it for future gen- 
erations, and for this generation now. That's why I'm here — because 
if I don't support Julian now, in the things that he is going through, 
what kind of world am I building? What kind of message do I send 



153 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



when I let a bunch of pigs push me around? No way, never. We have 
to build and we have to change that. As Gandhi said, "You have to be 
the change you want to see in the world," but you have to be the trou- 
ble you want to see in the world, too. 126 That's a line from A Softer 
World, it's not the same as the Gandhi quotation, but I think people 
need to know that they cannot just sit idly by, they need to actually 
take action, and hopefully they will. 127 

ANDY: I think we're seeing a good chance that people can proceed 
further on from where we are, and alternatives come from people 
who are unsatisfied with the situation they find or the options they 
have. 

JULIAN: Can you talk a bit about the Chaos Computer Club in this 
context? 

ANDY: Always CCC... fnord. 128 

JULIAN: It is unique in the world, actually. 

ANDY: The CCC is a galactic hacker organization that promotes free- 
dom of information, transparency of technology, and cares about 
the relationship between human and technological development, so 
society and development interacting with each other. 

JULIAN: This has actually become political. 



154 



CYPHERPUNKS 



ANDY: The CCC has become like a forum of the hacker scene with a 
few thousand members based a little bit in Germany — but we don't 
understand ourselves as living in Germany, we understand our- 
selves as living in the internet, which is perhaps a big part of our 
self-understanding which also attracts. We are very well-networked 
with other hacker groups in France, in America and other places. 

JULIAN: And why do you think that this started in Germany? The 
heart is in Germany — it's expanded out to the rest of the world. 

ANDY: Germans always try to structure everything. 

JEREMIE: German engineering is better. 

J U LI AN : But I think it's not just that. It's that this is Berlin and it's the 
fall of the East. 

ANDY: It has to do with different things. Germany has done the worst 
thing a country can to do to others, so it is perhaps a bit more immune 
to doing those things again, like starting a war with other countries. 
We've done it all, we've been through it, we've been punished hard and 
we had to learn from it, and actually this decentralized thinking and 
anti-fascistic behavior, like avoiding a totalitarian state, is still taught 
in German schools because we experienced that at the worst level. 
So I think that is part of understanding the CCC, which is a bit of a 
German phenomenon. Wau Holland, the creator who founded the 
CCC, also had a very heavily political approach to this. I saw his father 
at his grave, when his son actually died before him, and his father was 



155 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



not saying pleasant words. He said: "...and that there will never be 
any totalitarian, non-peaceful activities from German ground again." 
That was his father's comment when he buried his son, and for me 
that explained a lot about why Wau was so heavily into influencing 
and taking care of people, acting peacefully with others, spread- 
ing ideas and not limiting them, and not behaving aggressively but 
co-operatively. 

And the thought of co-operatively creating things — like open 
source movements and so on — has indeed been infecting and com- 
ing together with the thoughts of American cypherpunks and Julian 
Assange/WikiLeaks and so on. This is a global thing going on now, 
which does have very different, very decentralized cultural attitudes 
of Swiss, German, Italian hackers — and that is good. Italian hackers 
behave totally differently than German hackers — wherever they are, 
they need to make good food; with German hackers, they need to 
have everything well-structured. I'm not saying the one is better than 
the other, I'm just saying that each of these decentralized cultures 
has its very beautiful parts. At the Italian hacker conference you can 
go to the kitchen and you will see a wonderful place; at the German 
hacker camp you will see a wonderful internet, but you better not 
look at the kitchen. Still, the heart of it is we are creating. And I think 
we find ourselves in some kind of a common consciousness which 
is totally away from our national identity — from being Germans or 
from being Italians or from being Americans or whatever — we just 
see that we want to solve problems, we want to work together. We 
see this internet censorship, this fight by governments against new 
technology, as some kind of evolutionary situation which we have 
to overcome. 



156 



CYPHERPUNKS 



We are on the way to identifying solutions and not only prob- 
lems, and that is a good thing. We probably still have to fight a lot of 
bullshit for the next I don't know how many years, but now finally 
there's a generation of politicians coming up who don't see the inter- 
net as the enemy but understand that it is part of the solution, and 
not part of the problem. We still have a world built on weapons, on 
the power of secret-keeping, on an entire economic framework and 
so on, but that is changing and I do think we are very important in 
the policy-making right now. We can discuss the issues in a con- 
troversial way — and that is something that the CCC has managed 
for a long time, actually. We are not a homogeneous group, we have 
very different opinions. I appreciate that we sit here together and we 
don't come up with the best answers right away, we just come up with 
questions, and we crash our different ideas on the table and see what 
the bottom line is. That's the process that needs to go on, and that's 
what we need a free internet for. 

J U LI AN : I posed the question of what the most positive traj ectory for 
the future would look like. Self-knowledge, diversity, and networks 
of self-determination. A highly educated global population — I 
do not mean formal education, but highly educated in their under- 
standing of how human civilization works at the political, indus- 
trial, scientific and psychological levels — as a result of the free 
exchange of communication, also stimulating vibrant new cultures 
and the maximal diversification of individual thought, increased 
regional self-determination, and the self-determination of interest 
groups that are able to network quickly and exchange value rapidly 
over geographic boundaries. And perhaps that has been expressed 



157 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



in the Arab Spring and the pan- Arab activism which was poten- 
tiated by the internet. In our work with Nawaat.org, who created 
Tunileaks, pushing the State Department cables past the regime's 
censorship into pre-revolutionary Tunisia, we saw first-hand the 
terrific power of the network for moving information to where it is 
needed, and it was tremendously rewarding to have been in a posi- 
tion, because of our efforts, to contribute to what was starting to hap- 
pen there. 129 1 do not perceive that struggle for self-determination 
as distinct from our own. 

This positive trajectory would entail the self-knowing of human 
civilization because the past cannot be destroyed. It would mean the 
inability of neo-totalitarian states to arise in practice because of the 
free movement of information, the ability for people to speak to each 
other privately and conspire against such tendencies, and the abil- 
ity for micro-capital to move without control away from such places 
which are inhospitable to human beings. 

From those underpinnings you can build a wide variety of 
political systems. Utopia to me would be a dystopia if there was 
just one. I think Utopian ideals must mean the diversity of systems 
and models of interaction. If you look at the churning development 
of new cultural products and even language drift, and sub-cultures 
forming their own mechanisms of interaction potentiated by the 
internet, then yes I can see that that does open this possible posi- 
tive path. 

But I think in all probability tendencies to homogenization, 
universality, the whole of human civilization being turned into 
one market, mean you will have normal market factors such as one 
market leader, one second, a third niche player, and then stragglers 



158 



CYPHERPUNKS 



that don't make any difference at all, for every service and product. 
I think it will perhaps mean massive language homogenization, mas- 
sive cultural homogenization, massive standardization in order to 
make these rapid interchanges efficient. So I think the pessimistic 
scenario is also quite probable, and the transnational surveillance 
state and endless drone wars are almost upon us. 

Actually I'm reminded of a time when I smuggled myself into 
Sydney Opera House to see Faust. Sydney Opera House is very 
beautiful at night, its grand interiors and lights beaming out over 
the water and into the night sky. Afterwards I came out and I heard 
three women talking together, leaning on the railing overlooking the 
darkened bay. The older woman was describing how she was hav- 
ing problems with her job, which turned out to be working for the 
CIA as an intelligence agent, and she had previously complained 
to the Senate Select Committee for Intelligence and so on, and she 
was telling this in hushed tones to her niece and another woman. 
I thought, "So it is true then. CIA agents really do hang out at the 
Sydney opera!" And then I looked inside the Opera House through 
the massive glass panels at the front, and there in all this lonely pala- 
tial refinement was a water rat that had crawled up in to the Opera 
House interior, and was scurrying back and forth, leaping on to the 
fine linen-covered tables and eating the Opera House food, jumping 
on to the counter with all the tickets and having a really great time. 
And actually I think that is the most probable scenario for the future: 
an extremely confining, homogenized, postmodern transnational 
totalitarian structure with incredible complexity, absurdities and 
debasements, and within that incredible complexity a space where 
only the smart rats can go. 



159 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



That's a positive angle on the negative trajectory, the negative 
trajectory being a transnational surveillance state, drone-riddled, 
the networked neo-feudalism of the transnational elite — not in a 
classical sense, but a complex multi-party interaction that has come 
about as a result of various elites in their own national countries 
lifting up together, off their respective population bases, and merg- 
ing. All communications will be surveilled, permanently recorded, 
permanently tracked, each individual in all their interactions perma- 
nently identified as that individual to this new Establishment, from 
birth to death. That's a major shift from even ten years ago and we're 
already practically there. I think that can only produce a very con- 
trolling atmosphere. If all the collected information about the world 
was public that might rebalance the power dynamic and let us, as a 
global civilization, shape our destiny. But without dramatic change 
it will not. Mass surveillance applies disproportionately to most of 
us, transferring power to those in on the scheme who nonetheless, 
I think, will not enjoy this brave new world much either. This system 
will also coincide with a drones arms race that will eliminate clearly 
denned borders as we know them, since such borders are produced 
by the contestation of physical lines, resulting in a state of perpet- 
ual war as the winning influence-networks start to shake down the 
world for concessions. And alongside this people are going to just be 
buried under the impossible math of bureaucracy. 

How can a normal person be free within that system? They 
simply cannot, it's impossible. Not that anyone can ever be com- 
pletely free, within any system, but the freedoms that we have 
biologically evolved for, and the freedoms that we have become 
culturally accustomed to, will be almost entirely eliminated. 



160 



CYPHERPUNKS 



So I think the only people who will be able to keep the freedom that 
we had, say, twenty years ago — because the surveillance state has 
already eliminated quite a lot of that, we just don't realize it yet — 
are those who are highly educated in the internals of this system. 
So it will only be a high-tech rebel elite that is free, these clever rats 
running around the opera house. 



161 



ENDNOTES 



1. Put simply, cryptography, from the Greek for "secret writing," is the 
practice of communicating in code. 

2. "Oxford English Dictionary Updates Some Entries & Adds New Words; 
Bada-Bing, Cypherpunk, and Wi-Fi Now in the OED," BesourceShelf, 
September 16, 2006: http://web.resourceshelf.com/go/resourceblog/43743 
(accessed October 24, 2012). 

3. WikiLeaks: http://wikileaks.org 

4. For more on the rubberhose file see: "The Idiot Savants' Guide to 
Bubberhose," Suelette Dreyfus: http://mamtukku.org/current/src/doc/ 
maruguide/tl.html (accessed October 14, 2012). 

5. For more on the book Underground see: http://www.under- 
ground-book.net 

For more on the movie Underground: The Julian Assange Story see the 
Internet MovieDatabase:http://www.imdb.com/title/tt235745.3/(accessed 
October 21, 2012). 

6. Noisebridge is a San Francisco-based hackerspace, an infrastructure 
provider for technical-creative projects, collaboratively run by its mem- 
bers: https://www.noisebridge.net/wiki/Noisebridge 

Chaos Computer Club Berlin is the Berlin organization of the Chaos 
Computer Club (for which see below): https://berlin.ccc.de/wiki/ 
Chaos_Computer_Club_Berlin 

7. Tor Project: https://www.toiproject.org 

8. The Chaos Computer Club is Europe's largest hacker association. Its 
activities range from technical research and exploration to campaigns, 
events, publications and policy advice: http://www.ccc.de 

9. EDRI: http://www.edri.org 

10. ICANN: http://www.icann.org 

11. buggedplanet: http://l5uggedplanet.info 



163 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



12. Cryptophone: http://www.cryptophone.de 

13. La Quadrature du Net: http://www.laquadrature.net 

14. Collateral Murder: http://www.collateralinurder.com 
The Iraq War Logs: http://wikileaks.org/irq 

The Afghan War Diaiy: http://wikileaks.org/afg 
Cablegate : http ://wikileaks . org/cablegate . html 

15. "Congressional committee holds hearing on national security leak preven- 
tion and punishment," Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, 
July 11, 2012: http://www.rcfp.org/browse-media-law-resources/news/ 
congressional-committee-holds-hearing-national-security-leak-prevent 
(accessed October 21, 2012). 

16. For further information on the WikiLeaks Grand Jury consult free- 
lance journalist Alexa O'Brien's timeline: http://www.alexaobrien.com/ 
timehne_us_versus_manning_assange_wikileaks_2012.html (accessed 
October 22, 2012). 

17. "Bradley Manning's treatment was cruel and inhuman, UN torture 
chief rules," Guardian, March 12, 2012: http://www.guardian.co.uk/ 
world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un 
(accessed October 24, 2012). 

18. "WikiLeaks: guilty parties "should face death penalty,"" Telegraph, 
December 1, 2010: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worklnews/ 
wikileaks/8172916/WikiLeaks-guilty-parties-should-face-death-penalty. 
html (accessed October 22, 2012). 

19. "CIA launches task force to assess impact of U.S. cables' exposure by 
WikiLeaks," Washington Post, December 22, 2012: http://www.wash- 
ingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/12/21/AR2010122104599. 
html?hpid=topnews&sid=ST2010122105304 (accessed October 22, 
2012). 

20. 'WikiLeaks fights to stay online after US company withdraws domain 
name," Guardian, December 3, 2012: http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/ 
blog/2010/dec/03/wikileaks-knocked-off-net-dns-everydns (accessed 
October 23, 2012). 

21. "Don't Look, Don't Read: Government Warns Its Workers Away From 
WikiLeaks Documents," New York Times, December 4, 2010: http:// 
www. nytimes. com/20 10/12/05/woiid/05restrict.html?hp&_r=2& 
(accessed October 23, 2012). 

22. "Banking Blockade," WikiLeaks: http://www.wikileaks.org/Banking- 
Blockade.html (accessed October 22, 2012) 



164 



CYPHERPUNKS 



23. Jacob's written account of his detentions is recommended reading. See: 
"Air Space — a trip through an airport detention center," boingboing, 
October 31, 2011: http://boingboing.net/2011/10/31/air-space-a-trip- 
through-an-ai.html. 

Also of importance is an interview with Jacob about the detentions on 
Democracy Now. "National Security Agency Whistleblower William 
Binney on Growing State Surveillance," Democracy Now, April 20, 2012: 
http://www.democracynow.Org/2012/4/20/exclusive_national_security_ 
agency_whistleblower_william (both links accessed October 23, 2012). 

24. The case is officially known as In the Matter of the 2703(d) Order Relating 
to Twitter Accounts: Wikileaks Rop_G IOERROR; and BirgittaJ. 

25. "Secret orders target email," Wall Street Journal, October 9, 2011: http:// 
online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203476804576613284007315 
072.html (accessed October 22, 2012). 

26. "Twitter Ordered to Yield Data in WikiLeaks Case," New York Times, 
November 10, 2011: https://www.nytimes.com/2011/ll/ll/technology/ 
twitter-ordered-to-yield-data-in-\vikileaks-case.html?_r=l (accessed 
October 22, 2012). 

27. "ACLU & EFF to Appeal Secrecy Ruling in Twitter/WikiLeaks Case," 
Electronic Frontier Foundation press release, January 20, 2012: https:// 
www.eff.org/press/releases/aclu-eff-appeal-secrecy-ruling-twitter- 
wikileaks-case (accessed October 22, 2012). 

28. This was the April 6, 2008 protest in support of the suppressed strike 
of the Mahalla al-Kobra textile workers. Shortly before the strike the 
"April 6 Youth Movement" was formed as a Facebook group, conceived 
to encourage Egyptians to hold protests in Cairo and elsewhere to coin- 
cide with the industrial action in Mahalla. The protests did not go to plan, 
and the Facebook groups administrators Esraa Abdel Fattah Ahmed 
Rashid and Ahmed Maher were arrested, along with others. Maher was 
tortured for his Facebook password. The April 6 Youth Movement went 
on to play a role in the 2011 Egyptian revolution. See "Cairo Activists 
Use Facebook to Rattle Regime," Wired, October 20, 2008: http://www. 
wired. com/techbiz/startups/magazine/16-ll/ff_facebookegypt?current- 
Page=all (accessed October 23, 2012). 

29. "How to Protest Intelligently," anonymous authors, distributed at the out- 
set of the eighteen-day uprising that removed President Mubarak (Arabic) : 
http://www.itstime.it/Approfondimenti/EgyptianRevolutionManual.pdf. 
Excerpts from the document were translated into English and published 
as, "Egyptian Activists' Action Plan: Translated," Atlantic, January 27, 201 1: 

165 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2011/01/egyptian- 
activists-action-plan-translated/70388 (both links accessed October 23, 
2012). 

30. The Panopticon was a prison devised by the philosopher Jeremy Bentham 
in 1787, designed so as to allow one prison guard to covertly surveil all 
prisoners at once via hne of sight. Jeremy Bentham (edited by Miran 
Bozovic), The Panopticon Writings, (Verso, 1995), available online at: 
http://cartome.org/panopticon2.htm (accessed October 22, 2012). 

3 1 . Johannes Gutenberg (1398- 1468) was a German blacksmith who invented 
mechanical movable type printing, an invention that gave rise to some of 
the most significant social upheaval in history. The invention of the print- 
ing press is the closest historical analogue to the invention of the internet. 

32. John Gilmore is one of the original cypherpunks, a founder of the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation, and a civil liberties activist. The phrase 
cited by Andy was first quoted in: "First Nation in Cyberspace," Time 
Magazine, December 6, 1993. See John Gilmore's site: http://www.toad. 
com/gnu (accessed October 22, 2012). 

33. "Proprietary technologies are any types of systems, tools, or technical pro- 
cesses that are developed by and for a specific business entity. . . [T]he ideas 
developed and submitted by employees are usually considered the intellec- 
tual property of the employer, thus allowing them to qualify as proprietary 
technology." Definition taken from wiseGEEK: http://www.wisegeek.com/ 
what-is-proprietaiy-technology.htm (accessed October 22, 2012). 

34. Cory Doctorow, "The coming war on general-purpose computing," 
boingboing, January 10, 2012 (based on a keynote speech delivered to 
the Chaos Computer Congress, December 2011): http://boingboing. 
net/2012/Ol/lO/lockdown.html (accessed October 15, 2012). 

35. Stuxnet is a highly sophisticated computer worm widely believed to 
have been developed by the US and Israel to attack Siemens equip- 
ment allegedly used by Iran for uranium enrichment. For an overview of 
Stuxnet, see Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuxnet. 

See also, "WikiLeaks: US advised to sabotage Iran nuclear sites by 
German thinktank," Guardian, January 18, 2011: http://www.guardian. 
co.uk/world/2011/jan/18/wikileaks-us-embassy-cable-iran-nuclear. 
WikiLeaks carried one of the earliest reports of the effects now believed 
to have been a result of Stuxnet — the nuclear accident at Natanz nuclear 
facility in Iran. See, "Serious nuclear accident may lay behind Iranian 
nuke chief's mystery resignation," WikiLeaks, July 17, 2009: http:// 



166 



CYPHERPUNKS 



wikileaks.org/wiki/Serious_nuclear_accident_may_lay_behind_Iranian_ 
nuke_chief%27s_mystery_resignation. 

Evidence from the global intelligence company Stratfor, leaked by 
WikiLeaks, suggests Israeli involvement. See Email ID 185945, The 
Global Intelligence Files: http://wikileaks.org/gifiles/docs/185945_re-al- 
pha-s3-g3-israel-iran-barak-hails-munitions-blast-in.html (all links 
accessed October 16, 2012). 

36. Pentesting, short for penetration testing, is a security engineering term 
for conducting an attack in a legally authorized manner on a computer 
system or a computer network, as an unauthorized user might, in order 
to evaluate how secure it is. Security researchers are often recruited from 
the hacker community to conduct penetration testing on secure systems. 

37. Capture the Flag is originally an outdoor game, normally involving two 
teams, where both teams hold a position and guard a flag. The objective 
is to capture the other team's flag, and return it to base. At hacker con- 
ferences hackers play a computer-based version where teams attack and 
defend computers and networks. 

38. Sysadmin Cup is a contraction of System Administrator Cup. A system 
administrator is a person working in the IT profession who maintains and 
operates a computer system or network. Jacob is saying that the exercise 
was like a tournament for system administrators. 

39. "Aaron says encryption protects privacy, commerce," USIS Washington 
File, October 13, 1998: http://www.fas.org/irp/news/1998/10/98101306_ 
clt.html (accessed October 21, 2012). 

40. Wassenaar Arrangement website: http://www.wassenaar.org (accessed 
October 21, 2012). 

41. Andy is referring to various developments in the "First Crypto Wars" 
of the 1990s. When eypherpunk activists began to spread strong cryp- 
tographic tools as free software, the US administration took steps to pre- 
vent cryptographic tools being used effectively. It classified cryptography 
as a munition and restricted its export; it tried to introduce competing 
technologies that were deliberately broken so that law enforcement could 
always decrypt information; and it tried to introduce the controversial 
"key escrow" scheme. For a short period after the turn of the century 
it was widely accepted that these efforts had been comprehensively 
defeated. However, a "Second Crypto War" is now well underway, with 
legislative and technical efforts to backdoor or otherwise marginalize the 
use of cryptography. 



167 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



42. The sample calculation was for the published 196.4 billion minutes 
of land-line calls in Germany in 2010, digitized with an 8 Kbps voice- 
codec, summing up to an amount of 11,784 Petabyte (Pb), rounded up 
with overhead to 15 Pb. Assuming rough storage costs of 500,000 USD 
(500 KUSD) for a Pb, that is 7.5 million USD or about 6 million EUR. 
Add costs for a decent data center setup, processing power, connections 
and man power. Even if all 101 billion minutes of mobile phone calls in 
Germany in 2010 are included, with another 50 Pb and 18.3 million EUR, 
the price is still less than a single military airplane like the Eurofighter (90 
million EUR) or the F22 (150 million USD). 

43. For more on VASTech see buggedplanet: http://buggedplanet.info/index. 
php?title=VASTECH (accessed October 21, 2012). 

44. The NSA warrantless domestic surveillance scandal is the most con- 
sequential case of mass surveillance in United States history. The US 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 1978 (FISA) made it illegal for US 
agencies to spy on US citizens without a warrant. After 9/11, the NSA 
began to engage in mass violations of FISA, authorized by a secret exec- 
utive order of George W. Rush. The Bush administration claimed exec- 
utive authority to do this under 2001 emergency legislation passed by 
Congress: The Authorization for the Use of Military Force (AUMF), and 
the PATRIOT ACT. The NSAs warrantless domestic spying program — 
which involved co-operation from private companies, including AT&T — 
remained secret until 2005, when it was exposed by the New York Times. 
See "Bush Lets U.S. Spy on Callers Without Courts," New York Times, 
December 16, 2005: http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/16/pohtics/16pro- 
gram.html?pagewanted=all. 

Reporters for the New York Times had been contacted by an anonymous 
whistleblower who had leaked the existence of the warrantless surveil- 
lance program. In 2004 the then executive editor of the New York Times, 
Bill Keller, agreed on the request of the Bush administration to withhold 
the stoiy for a year, until after Bush was reelected. In 2005, the New York 
Times rushed to print the stoiy when it learned of a possible Pentagon 
Papers-style prior restraint injunction being sought by the administration. 
The Bush administration denied that there was any illegality involved 
in the NSA program. The Justice Department launched an immediate 
investigation into the source of the leak, involving twenty-five federal 
agents and five prosecutors. Senior officials within the Republican Party 
called for the prosecution of the New York Times under the Espionage 
Act. 



168 



CYPHERPUNKS 



In the wake of the New York Times stoiy other whistleblowers came for- 
ward to the press, gradually presenting a detailed picture of lawlessness 
and waste at the highest levels of the NSA. A host of class action law- 
suits were taken by advocacy groups like the American Civil Liberties 
Union (ACLU) and the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF). In one of 
these cases, ACLU v. NSA, the plaintiffs were denied standing because 
they could not prove that they had been personally spied on. In another, 
Hepting v. AT&T, an AT&T whistleblower, Mark Klein, came forward 
with an affidavit revealing the extent of AT&T's cooperation with the 
domestic spying program. See the Hepting v. AT&T section on the EFF 
website : https ://www. eff . org/cases/hepting. 

Mark Klein was a witness in Hepting v. AT&T. An ex-employee of AT&T 
working in Folsom, San Francisco, his affidavit to the EFF in Hepting v. 
AT&T disclosed the existence of "Room 641A," a strategic interception 
facility operated by AT&T for the NSA. The facility provided access to 
fiber optic trunks containing Internet backbone traffic, giving the capacity 
to engage in surveillance of all internet traffic passing through the build- 
ing, both foreign and domestic. Another NSA whistleblower, William 
Binney, has estimated that there are as many as twenty such facilities, all 
placed at key points in the United States' telecommunications network. 
Klein's affidavit gives important information about the character of the 
NSA surveillance program, confirmed by NSA whistleblowers. This is an 
example of "strategic interception" — all internet traffic passing through 
the United States is copied and stored indefinitely. It can be known with 
certainty that domestic US traffic is also intercepted and stored, because, 
from an engineering standpoint, when dealing with this volume of traffic 
it is impossible to screen out traffic for which a FISA warrant would be 
required. Official legal interpretation of FISA now holds that an "inter- 
cept" has only occurred when a domestic communication already inter- 
cepted and stored by the NSA is "accessed" on the NSAs database, and 
that it is only at this stage that a warrant is required. US citizens should 
assume that all their telecommunications traffic (including voice calls, 
SMS, email, and web browsing) is monitored and stored forever in NSA 
data centers. 

In 2008, in response to a high volume of litigation following from the 
wiretap scandal, the US Congress passed amendments to the 1978 FISA 
law, which were immediately signed in by the President. These created 
grounds for the grant of a highly controversial "retroactive immunity" 
against prosecution for violation of FISA. Senator Barack Obama, during 



169 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



his presidential campaign, had made "transparency" a part of his plat- 
form, and promised to protect whistleblowers, but when he entered office 
in 2009 his Justice Department continued the Bush administration's 
policies, eventually defeating the Hepting case and others with the grant 
of "retroactive immunity" for AT&T. 

While the Justice Department's investigation into the source of the 
original New York Times story failed to turn up the whistleblower, 
it did uncover whistleblowers that had come forward after the story. 
One such was Thomas Drake, a former senior executive of the NSA, 
who had for years complained internally to Congressional Intelligence 
Oversight Committees about corruption and wastefulness within the 
NSA's "Trailblazer" program. The internal complaints were suppressed, 
as were any government employees willing to pursue them. After the 
New York Times story, Drake had disclosed the Trailblazer story to the 
Baltimore Sun. He was indicted by a Grand Jury investigation, designated 
an "enemy of the state," and charged under the Espionage Act. See "The 
Secret Sharer," New Yorker, May 23, 2011: http://www.newyorker.com/ 
reporting/2011/05/23/110523fa_fact_mayer?currentPage=all. 
The Drake prosecution collapsed after intense public scrutiny in June 
2011, and after unsuccessful attempts to compel Drake into a plea bar- 
gain the Justice Department settled for his plea of guilty in respect of one 
minor misdemeanor. Drake received one year of probation. 
The fallout from the NSA surveillance scandal continues. The ACLU is 
litigating to challenge the constitutionality of the 2008 FISA amendments 
in Amnesty et. al. v. Clapper. See "FISA Amendment Act Challenge," 
ACLU, September 24, 2012: http://www.aclu.org/national-security/ 
amnesty-et-al-v-clapper. 

In Jewel v. NSA, the EFF is seeking to put an end to the NSA's warrant- 
less surveillance. The case was dismissed in 2009 after the Obama admin- 
istration argued immunity by virtue of national security secrets. See the 
EFF page on Jewel v. NSA: https://www.eff.org/cases/jewel. However, 
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals allowed the case to be reopened in 
December 2011. Thomas Drake and other NSA whistleblowers William 
Binney and J. Kirk Wiebe are giving evidence in Jewel v. NSA. The 
Obama administration — which ran on a platform of government trans- 
parency — has prosecuted more whistleblowers under the Espionage 
Act than all previous administrations combined. (All links in this note 
accessed October 23, 2012.) 
45. See the entry for the Eagle system on buggedplanet: 



170 



CYPHERPUNKS 



http://buggedplanet.info/index.php?title = AMESYS#Strate- 
gic_.28.22Massive.22.29_Appliances (accessed October 22, 2012). 

46. "German court orders stored telecoms data deletion," BBC, March 2, 
2010: http://news.bbc.co.uk/ldii/worlcl/europe/8545772.stin (accessed 
October 15, 2012). 

47. Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament and Council requires 
European states to store citizens' telecommunications data for six to 
twenty-four months. It was the application of this Directive to German 
law that was ruled unconstitutional in Germany. In May 2012 the EU 
Commission referred Germany to the European Court of Justice for not 
complying with the Directive (see the Commission's press release: http:// 
europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-12-530_en.htm (accessed October 15, 
2012)). 

48. See "Sweden approves wiretapping law," BBC, June 19, 2008: http:// 
news.bbc.co.uk/l/lii/world/europe/7463333.stm. 

For more on the FRA-lagen, see Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
FRAJaw (both links accessed October 10, 2012). 

49. Metadata is "data about data." In the context of this discussion, metadata 
refers to data other than the "content" of the electronic communication. 
It is the front of the envelope, rather than the contents. Surveillance of 
metadata does not target the contents of emails, but rather all the infor- 
mation surrounding the contents — who the email was sent to or from, the 
IP addresses (and therefore location) from which it was sent, the times 
and dates of each email, etc. The point is, however, that the technology to 
intercept metadata is the same technology as the technology to intercept 
the contents. If you grant someone the right to surveil your metadata, 
their equipment must also intercept the contents of your communica- 
tions. Besides this, most people do not realize that "metadata in aggregate 
is content" — when all the metadata is put together it provides an aston- 
ishingly detailed picture of a person's communications. 

50. Amesys is part of the Bull group, once a competitor to IBM's Dehomag in 
selling punch card systems to the Nazis. See Edwin Black, IBM and the 
Holocaust (Crown Books, 2001). 

For more on how Gaddafi spied on Libyans in the UK using Amesys 
surveillance equipment see, "Exclusive: How Gaddafi Spied on the 
Fathers of the New Libya," OWNI.eu, December 1, 2011: http://owni. 
eu/2011/12/Ol/exclusive-how-gaddafi-spied-on-the-fathers-of-the-new- 
libya (accessed October 22, 2012). 



171 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



51. WikiLeaks began releasing The Spy Files, exposing the extent of mass 
surveillance, in December 2011. They can be accessed at http://wikileaks. 
org/the-spyflles.html. 

52. For more detail see buggedplanet: http://buggedplanet.info/index. 
php?title=LY 

53. The Chaos Communication Congress is an annual meeting of the inter- 
national hacker scene, organized by the Chaos Computer Club. 

54. Jacob is referring to ZTE, one of two Chinese producers (the other being 
Huawei) of electronic goods that are widely suspected of containing 
"backdoors." Jacob means to suggest that the "gift" of communications 
infrastructure comes with a cost — that it will, by design, be susceptible to 
Chinese surveillance. 

55. Kill Your Television is the name for a form of protest against mass com- 
munications, whereby people eschew television for social activities. 

56. The "network effect" is the effect that one person's performing an activity 
has on other people's likelihood to perform that activity. 

57. For more on the Grand Jury investigation, see "Note on the various 
attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and people associated with it" preced- 
ing the discussion. 

58. According to the Wall Street Journal: "The U.S. government has obtained 
a controversial type of secret court order to force Google Inc. and small 
Internet provider Sonic.net Inc. to turn over information from the email 
accounts of WikiLeaks volunteer Jacob Appelbaum, according to doc- 
uments reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. . . The WikiLeaks case 
became a test bed for the law's interpretation earlier this year when 
Twitter fought a court order to turn over records from the accounts of 
WikiLeaks supporters including Mr. Appelbaum. . . The order sought the 
"Internet protocol," or IP, addresses of the devices from which people 
logged into their accounts. An IP address is a unique number assigned 
to a device connected to the Internet. The order also sought the email 
addresses of the people with whom those accounts communicated. The 
order was filed under seal, but Twitter successfully won from the court 
the right to notify the subscribers whose information was sought... The 
court orders reviewed by the Journal seek the same type of information 
that Twitter was asked to turn over. The secret Google order is dated Jan. 
4 and directs the search giant to hand over the IP address from which 
Mr. Appelbaum logged into his gmail.com account and the email and IP 
addresses of the users with whom he communicated dating back to Nov. 
1, 2009. It isn't clear whether Google fought the order or turned over 



172 



CYPHERPUNKS 



documents. The secret Sonic order is dated April 15 and directs Sonic 
to turn over the same type of information from Mr. Appelbaum's email 
account dating back to Nov. 1, 2009. On Aug. 31, the court agreed to 
lift the seal on the Sonic order to provide Mr. Appelbaum a copy of it." 
"Secret orders target email," Wall Street Journal, October 9, 2011: http:// 
online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203476804576613284007315 
072.html (accessed October 11, 2012). For more detail, see "Note on the 
various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and people associated with it" 
preceding the discussion. 

59. "WikiLeaks demands Google and Facebook unseal US subpoenas," 
Guardian, January 8, 2011: http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/ 
jan/08/wikileaks-calls-google-facebook-us-subpoenas (accessed October 
16, 2012). 

For more detail, see "Note on the various attempts to persecute 
WikiLeaks and people associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

60. See "Note on the various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and people 
associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

61. For more details see the Europe versus Facebook website: http:// 
www.europe-v-facebook.org/EN/Data_Pool/data_pool.html (accessed 
October 24, 2012). 

62. A National Security Letter, or NSL, is a letter from a US agency demand- 
ing "non-content data" or "metadata," such as financial transaction 
records, IP logs or email contacts. Anyone who receives an NSL must 
turn over the requested records or face prosecution. An NSL does not 
require authorization by a court — it can be issued directly by a federal 
agency. For this reason it is similar to a so-called "administrative sub- 
poena" — an order to produce information that requires only administra- 
tive, rather than judicial, oversight. On this basis, NSLs arguably violate 
Fourth Amendment protections against arbitrary search and seizure. 
NSLs also contain a "gag component," which means that it is a criminal 
offense for someone who receives an NSL to talk about it to anyone else. 
On this basis, NSLs arguably violate First Amendment protections on 
the freedom of speech. In Doe v. Gonzales, the gag provision of NSLs 
was ruled unconstitutional. The law was changed to grant recipients of 
an NSL rights to challenge the NSL in court, which satisfied the Second 
Circuit Court that their use was no longer unconstitutional. NSLs con- 
tinue to be criticized by civil liberties groups, and challenged in court. 
The use of NSLs vastly increased after the passage of the USA PATRIOT 
Act in 2001. The recipients of NSLs are typically service providers, such 



173 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



as ISPs or financial institutions. The records sought are normally those of 
the customers of the recipient. The recipient cannot inform the customer 
that their records have been demanded. While recipients have rights to 
challenge NSLs in court, the gag provision prevents the target from even 
knowing about the NSL, and therefore prevents them challenging it in 
court. To illustrate how difficult this is to justify, see a video of the FBI's 
deputy general counsel attempting to answer Jacob Appelbaum's ques- 
tion, "How am I supposed to go to a judge if the third party is gagged 
from telling me that I'm targeted by you?" Her answer, "There are times 
when we have to have those things in place, " is chilling: http://youtu.be/ 
dTuxoLDnmJU (also found with further contextual material at Privacy 
SOS: http://privacysos.org/node/727). 

According to the Electronic Frontier Foundation, "Of all the danger- 
ous government surveillance powers that were expanded by the USA 
PATRIOT Act the National Security Letter (NSL) power under 18 
U.S.C. 5 2709 as expanded by PATRIOT Section 505 is one of the most 
frightening and invasive. These letters served on communications ser- 
vice providers like phone companies and ISPs allow the FBI to secretly 
demand data about ordinary American citizens' private communications 
and Internet activity without any meaningful oversight or prior judi- 
cial review. Recipients of NSLs are subject to a gag order that forbids 
them from ever revealing the letters' existence to their coworkers, to 
their friends or even to their family members, much less the public." 
See: https://www.eff.org/issues/national-security-letters. See also the 
Electronic Frontier Foundations collection of documents relating to 
National Security Letters released under the Freedom of Information 
Act: https://www.eff.org/issues/foia/07656JDB (all links in this note 
accessed October 23, 2012). 

63. See note 41 above on the "First Crypto Wars" of the 1990s. 

64. Julian is referring to SSI/TLS, which is a cryptographic protocol now 
incorporated as standard into all web browsers, and used for secure 
browsing — for example, whenever a browser is used for internet banking. 

65. For one example among many, see, "Blackberry, Twitter probed in 
London riots," Bloomberg, August 9, 2011: http://www.bloomberg.com/ 
news/201 1-08-09/blaekberry-messages-probed-in-u-k-rioting-as-poliee- 
say-looting-organized.html (accessed October 16, 2012). 

66. For example, a member of the LulzSec group that exposed flaws in 
Sony's security practices by releasing Sony customers' personal data was 
arrested after his identity was gained from the proxy site HideMyAss. 



174 



CYPHERPUNKS 



com, via a court order in the US. See, "Lulzsec hacker pleads guilty over 
Sony attack," BBC, October 15, 2012: http://www.bbc.com/news/technol- 
ogy-19949624 (accessed October 15, 2012). 

67. SOPA refers to the Stop Online Piracy Act. PIPA refers to the Protect 
Intellectual Property Act. Both are proposed US laws which came to 
world prominence in early 2012. Both are transparent legislative expres- 
sions of the desire of the content industry, represented by bodies like 
the Recording Industry Association of America, to enforce intellectual 
property law globally, and as heavily as possible, in response to the free 
distribution of cultural artifacts online. Both laws proposed to grant 
heavy-handed and wide-reaching internet censorship powers to US law 
enforcement agencies, which threatened to "break the internet." Both 
laws earned the ire of substantial portions of the international online 
community and provoked a strong reaction from the industrial actors 
whose interests are in a free and open internet. 

In early 2012, Reddit, Wikipedia and several thousand other sites blacked 
out their services in protest against the laws, instigating heavy public 
pressure on public representatives. Other online service providers, such 
as Google, encouraged petitions. In response, both laws were suspended, 
pending reconsideration and discussion of whether they represent the 
best approach to the problem of intellectual property online. The episode 
is seen as the first significant discovery and assertion of effective congres- 
sional lobbying power by the internet industry. 

68. See the "Note on the various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and peo- 
ple associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

69. ACTA refers to the Anti-Counterfeit and Trade Agreement. It is a multi- 
lateral international treaty negotiated in secret over the course of years, 
led by the United States and Japan, part of which institutes new and dra- 
conian obligations to protect intellectual property. 

Initial drafts of ACTA were revealed to the public in 2008 after they 
were leaked to WikiLeaks, provoking widespread outcry from free cul- 
ture activists and online advocates. See the ACTA section on WikiLeaks: 
http://wikileaks.Org/wiki/Category:ACTA. 

US diplomatic cables shared with La Quadrature Du Net by WikiLeaks 
in early 2011 showed that ACTA was negotiated in secret explicitly in 
order to fast track the creation of extreme IP enforcement rules, which 
could later be coercively imposed on poorer countries excluded from the 
agreement. See, "WikiLeaks Cables Shine Light on ACTA History," La 



175 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL 



Quadrature Du Net, Februaiy 3, 2011: http://www.laquadrature.net/en/ 
wikdeaks-cables-shine-hght-on-aeta-history (accessed October 23, 2012). 
In July 2012, after a campaign led by La Quadrature Du Net and Jeremie 
Zimmermann, ACTA was defeated in the European Parliament. 

70. M.A.I.D., (Mutually) Assured Information Destruction, is "a framework 
that provides time sensitive remote key escrow and provable authentica- 
tion with optional distress coding. It automatically destroys cryptographic 
keys after a given user configurable time threshold is crossed": https:// 
www.noisebridge.net/wiki/M.A.I.D. 

Legislation such as the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act of 2000, or 
RIPA, makes the United Kingdom quite a hostile regime for cryptogra- 
phy. Under RIPA individuals can be obliged to decrypt data or surrender 
a password on the order of a police constable. No judicial oversight is 
necessary. Refusal to comply can result in criminal charges. In a resulting 
trial, if the defendant claims she/he has forgotten the password, there is a 
reverse burden of proof. In order to avoid being convicted the defendant 
must prove that she/lie has forgotten the password. This, it is argued by 
critics of the law, effectuates a presumption of guilt. Comparatively, while 
there has been much litigation in connection with the same issues in the 
United States, and the situation is by no means ideal, there has been 
far more success invoking the First and Fourth Amendments in similar 
circumstances. See the report, "Freedom from Suspicion, Surveillance 
Reform for a Digital Age," published by JUSTICE, November 4, 
2011, available from: http://www.justice.org.uk/resources.php/305/ 
freedom-from-suspicion. 

For more on the Rubberhose file system, see, "The Idiot Savants' Guide 
to Rubberhose," Suelette Dreyfus: http://marutukku.org/cuiTent/src/doc/ 
maruguide/tl .html (all links accessed October 24, 2012). 

71. An archive of the old Cypherpunk mailing list can be downloaded from: 
http://cryptome.org/cpunks/cpunks-92-98.zip. 

Tim May was a founding member of the Cypheqsunks mailing list. See 
his Cyphemomicon, an FAQ on cypherpunk history and philosophy: 
http://www.cypherpunks.to/faq/cyphernomicron/cyphernomicon.html 
(both links accessed October 24, 2012). 

72. "Proposed US ACTA plurilateral intellectual property trade agree- 
ment (2007)," WikiLeaks, May 22, 2008: http://wikileaks.org/wiki/ 
Proposed_US_ACTA_multi-lateral_intellectual_property_trade_agree- 
ment_%282007%29 (accessed October 21, 2012). 



176 



CYPHERPUNKS 



73. "Massive Takedown of Anti-Scientology Videos on YouTube," Electronic 
Frontier Foundation, September 5, 2008: https://www.eff.org/deep- 
links/2008/09/massive-takedown-anti-scientology-videos-youtube 
(accessed October 16, 2012). 

74. "EU-India Free Trade Agreement draft, 24 Feb 2009," WikiLeaks, June 
23, 2009: http://wikileaks.org/wiki/EU-India_Free_Trade_Agreement_ 
draft,_24_Feb_2009 (accessed October 21, 2012). 

75. Peer-to-peer, or P2P, refers to a network in which each computer can act 
as a client or a server for all the others (each computer can both give and 
receive information), allowing for the rapid sharing of content such as 
music, videos, documents or any kind of digital information. 

76. Cloud computing refers to a situation where many of the functions tra- 
ditionally performed by a computer, such as storing data (including user 
data for various applications), hosting and running software, and provid- 
ing the processing power to run the software, is done remotely, outside 
of the computer itself, "in the cloud" — generally by companies offering 
cloud computing services via the internet. Rather than needing a full per- 
sonal computer anymore, all the user needs is a device that can access 
the internet, and the rest is served to the user over the internet. The 
metaphor "in the cloud" obscures the fact that all the user's data and 
metadata are actually on a remote computer somewhere in a data center, 
most likely controlled by a big company such as Amazon, and while users 
no longer have complete control over it, someone else does. 

77. See the "Note on the various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and peo- 
ple associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

78. DIASPORA is a social network that allows each user to act as their own 
server by installing the DIASPORA software, enabling them to retain con- 
trol of their own data. It was created as a privacy-compliant alternative to 
Facebook. It is non-profit and user-owned: http://diasporaproject.org 

79. The original Napster (1999-2001) was a pioneering peer-to-peer service 
for sharing music. It was enormously popular but was soon shut down 
by legal action over copyright infringement from the Recording Industry 
Association of America. After bankruptcy the name Napster was bought 
and used for a separate online store selling music for money. 

80. See the "Note on the various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and peo- 
ple associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

81. Benjamin Bayart is president of the French Data Network, the old- 
est active ISP in France, and an advocate of net neutrality and free 



177 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



software. See his Wikipedia entry (in French): http://fr.wikipeclia.org/ 
wiki/Benjamin_Bayart (accessed October 15, 2012). 

82. Larry Lessig is an American academic and activist best known for his 
views on copyright and free culture. He blogs at: http://lessig.tumblr.com 
(accessed October 15, 2012). 

83. There is plenty of fascinating content in the US diplomatic cables 
released by WikiLeaks on this issue. For some interesting discussion, 
consult the following cables (by cable reference ID, links all accessed 
October 24, 2012): 

07BEIRUT1301: http://wikileaks.org/cable/2007/08/07BEIRUT1301.html 
08BEIRUT490: http://wikileaks.org/cable/2008/04/08BEIRUT490.html 
08BEIRUT505: http://wikileaks.org/cable/2008/04/08BEIRUT505.html 
08BEIRUT523: http://wikileaks.org/cable/2008/04/08BEIRUT523.html 

84. See cable reference ID 10MOSCOW228, WikiLeaks: http://wikileaks. 
org/cable/2010/02/10MOSCOW228.html (accessed October 24, 2012). 

85. For more on the due-process-free killing of American citizens Anwar 
al-Awlaki and his son Abdulrahman al-Awlaki see Glenn Greenwald, 
"The due-process-free assassination of U.S. citizens is now reality," Salon, 
September 30, 2011: http://www.s;don.com/2011/09/30/awlaki_6. And 
"The killing of Awlakis 16-year-old son," Salon, October 20, 2011: http:// 
www.salon.com/2011/10/20/the_killing_of_awlaki.s_16_year_old_son. 

"It is literally impossible to imagine a more violent repudiation of the 
basic blueprint of the republic than the development of a secretive, 
totally unaccountable executive branch agency that simultaneously col- 
lects information about all citizens and then applies a "disposition matrix" 
to determine what punishment should be meted out. This is classic polit- 
ical dystopia brought to reality" — Glenn Greenwald, "Obama moves to 
make the War on Terror permanent," Guardian, October 24, 2012: http:// 
www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/oct/24/obama-terrorism-kill- 
list (all links accessed October 24, 2012). 

86. For further information please consult The Anonymity Bibliography, 
Selected Papers in Anonymity, curated by Roger Dingledine and Nick 
Mathewson: http://freehaven.net/anonbib (accessed October 24, 2012). 
Chaumian currencies are centrally issued, but use cryptography to ensure 
anonymous transactions. Chaumian currencies contrast with Bitcoin, 
another electronic currency discussed extensively below, where all trans- 
actions are public but the currency has no central authority. 



178 



CYPHERPUNKS 



87. For more on the banking blockade of WikiLeaks see the "Note on the 
various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks and people associated with it" 
preceding the discussion. 

88. Julian is here referring to UK government plans to increase the use of 
electronic tags. See, "Over 100,000 offenders to be electronically tagged," 
Guardian, March 25, 2012: http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2012/ 
mar/25/prisons-and-probation-criminal-justice (accessed October 22, 
2012). 

At the time of the discussion Julian was under house arrest pending the 
outcome of his extradition case. After his solitary confinement without 
charge in December 2010, Julian's detention was converted to house 
arrest after providing bail moneys of over £300,000. As a condition of his 
bail he was confined to a specified address between certain hours, and 
this regime was enforced by an electronic tag fixed to his ankle, oper- 
ated by a private security firm on contract to the UK government. Julian's 
movements were controlled to the extent that he was compelled to check 
in with the police daily, by a particular time, for over 550 days. At the time 
of publication, Julian is confined to the Ecuadorian embassy in London, 
which is surrounded at all times by the London Metropolitan Police. 
In June 2012 Julian entered the embassy seeking political asylum from 
persecution by the United States government and its allies. He received 
asylum in August 2012. 

89. "Is CCA Trying to Take Over the World?" American Civil Liberties 
Union, February 21, 2012: http://www.aclu.org/blog/prisoners-rights/ 
cca-trying-take-over-world. 

"Passing House Bill will worsen already pressing civil rights issue," 
ANNARBOR.com, August 2, 2012: http://annarbor.com/news/opinion/ 
passing-house-bill-will-worsen-already-pressing-civil-rights-issue. 
See also "Goldman Sachs to invest $9. 6m in New York inmate rehabilita- 
tion," Guardian, August 2, 2012: http://www.guardian. co.uk/society/2012/ 
aug/02/goldman-sachs-invest-new-york-jail (all links accessed October 
24, 2012). 

90. Bitcoin (http://bitcoin.org) is the first truly successful implementation of a 
classic cypherpunk concept: the cryptographic digital currency. Bitcoin is 
discussed extensively below, but an excellent introductory explanation on 
the technology and philosophy behind it can be found in, "Understanding 
Bitcoin," Al Jazeera, June 9, 2012: http://www.aljazeera.com/indeptli/ 
opinion/2012/05/20125309437931677.html (accessed October 22, 2012). 



179 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



91. e-gold was a digital currency and business started in 1996. The owners 
and proprietors were indicted by the US Department of Justice for "con- 
spiracy to engage in money laundering." They pleaded guilty, and were 
given sentences of probation, home detention and community services. 
The sentencing judge claimed they deserved lenient sentences because 
they had not intended to engage in illegal activity. See, "Bullion and 
Bandits: The Improbable Rise and Fall of E-Gold," Wired, June 9, 2009: 
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2009/06/e-gold (accessed October 22, 
2012). 

92. Before the Internet, the X.25 network was the major global network for 
data exchange existing in parallel to the telephone network. The billing 
on X.25 was based on the amount of data sent and received, not on the 
length of a connection as with the telephone network. Gateways (so called 
PADs) allowed connection to the X.25 network from the telephone net- 
work with modems or acoustic couplers. For more details see Wikipedia: 
http://en.wikipedia.0rg/wiki/X.25 (accessed October 24, 2012). 

93. David Chaum is a cryptographer and inventor of cryptographic protocols. 
He is a pioneer of digital currency technologies and introduced eCash, 
one of the first anonymous cryptographic electronic currencies. 

94. On the effect of the negative press see, "Bitcoin implodes, falls more than 
90 percent from June peak," arstechnica, October 18, 2011: http://ar.s- 
technica.com/tech-policy/2011/10/bitcoin-implodes-down-more-than- 
90-percent-from-june-peak (accessed October 22, 2012). 

95. See, for example, "The Underground Website Where You Can Buy Any 
Drug Imaginable," Gawker, June 1, 2011: http://gawker.com/5805928/ 
the-underground-website-where-you-can-buy-any-drug-imaginable 
(accessed October 22, 2012). 

96. Lawrence Lessigs early work on copyright and culture (for example in 
his book Free Culture (2004)) has been supplanted in recent years by an 
interest in the corruption of American democracy through congressional 
lobbying. See The Lessig Wild: http://wiki.lessig.org 

97. The California Correctional Peace Officers Association is an influ- 
ential special interest group in California that routinely donates sev- 
en-figure totals in state elections, although it is not, year for year, the 
single largest campaign donor. See "California reelin," The Economist, 
March 17, 2011: http://www.economist.com/node/18359882. And 
"The Golden State's Iron Bars," Reason, July 2011: http://reason.com/ 
archives/201 1/06/23/the-golden-states-iron-bars. See also the California 
Correctional Peace Officers Association entiy on the FollowThe 

180 



CYPHERPUNKS 



Money website of the National Institute for Money in State Polities: littp:// 
www.followthemoneyorg/database/topcontributor.plitml?u=3286&y=0 
(all links accessed October 22, 2012). 
98. Heinz von Foerster (1911-2002) was an Austrian-American scientist and 
an architect of cybernetics. His so-called "ethical imperative" or com- 
mon motto is: "Act always so as to increase the number of choices," or in 
German, "Handle stets so, dafj die Anzalil der Wahhnoglichkeiten groBer 
wird." 

99. Jacob attributes this observation to John Gilmore. 

100. For more on the harassment of Jacob and other people associated with 
WikiLeaks see the "Note on the various attempts to persecute WikiLeaks 
and people associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

101. Isaac Mao is a Chinese blogger, software architect and venture capitalist. 
He is a co-founder of CNBlog.org and board member to the Tor Project. 

102. See the WikiLeaks page on Nadhmi Auchi: http://wikileaks.org/wiki/ 
Nadhmi_Auchi (accessed October 24, 2012). 

103. The stories can be found at WikiLeaks here: http://wikileaks.org/wiki/ 
Eight_stories_on_Obaina_linked_billionaire_Nadhmi_Auchi_cen- 
sored_from_the_Guardian,_Obseiver,_Telegraph_and_New_Statesman 
(accessed October 24, 2012). 

104. As a general note both http://cables.mrkva.eu/ and http://cablegatesearch. 
net provide excellent ways of comparing redacted versions of cables with 
full versions, in order to see what WikiLeaks' media partners redacted. 

105. "Qaddafi's Son Is Bisexual and Other Things the New York Times 
Doesn't Want You to Know," Gawker, September 16, 2011: http://gawker. 
com/5840809/qaddafis-son-is-bisexual-and-other-things-the-new-york- 
times-doesnt-want-you-to-know-about. 

The specific example cited refers to cable reference ID 06TRIPOLI198, 
WikiLeaks: https://wikileaks.org/cable/2006/05/06TRIPOLI198.html. 
The redactions can be seen visually on the Cablegatesearch website 
which shows the revision history, with the redactions shaded in pink: 
http://www.cablegatesearch. net/cable. php?id=06TRIPOLI198&ver- 
sion= 1291757400 (all links accessed October 22, 2012). 

106. For the original cable see cable reference ID 10STATE17263, WikiLeaks: 
http://wikileaks.org/cable/2010/02/10STATE17263.html. 

For the New York Times story see, "Iran Fortifies Its Arsenal With the 
Aid of North Korea," New York Times, November 29, 2010: http://www. 
nytimes. com/2010/1 l/29/world/middleeast/29missiles.html?_r=0. 



181 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



The same cable was also used by David Leigh of the Guardian for his 
story, "WikiLeaks cables expose Pakistan nuclear fears," Guardian, 
November 30, 2010: http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/nov/30/ 
wikileaks-cables-pakistan-nuclear-fears. The redacted version of the 
cable published by the Guardian, without a cable reference number, 
reduced it to just two paragraphs relating to Pakistan. "US embassy 
cables: XXXXXXXXXXXX," Guardian, November 30, 2010: http://www. 
guardian.co.uk/world/us-embassy-eables-documents/250573. 
The extent of the redaction can be seen visually on the Cablegatesearch 
website which shows the revision history, with the redaction of nearly 
the whole document shaded in pink: http://www.cablegatesearch.net/ 
cable.php?id=10STATE17263&version=1291486260 (all links accessed 
October 22, 2012). 

107. For the original cable see cable reference ID 08KYIV2414, WikiLeaks: 
http://wikileaks.org/cable/2008/12/08KYIV2414.html. 

For the Guardian redacted version see, "US embassy cables: Gas supplies 

linked to Russian mafia," December 1, 2010: http://www.guardian.co.uk/ 

world/us-embassy-cables-documents/182121?INTCMP=SRCH. 

The redaction can be seen visually on the Cablegatesearch website which 

shows the revision history, with the redactions shaded in pink: http://www. 

cablegatesearch.net/cable.php?id=08KYIV2414&version=1291255260 

(all links accessed October 22, 2012). 

108. For the original cable see cable reference ID 10ASTANA72, WikiLeaks: 
http://wikileaks.org/cable/2010/01/10ASTANA72.html. 

For the Guardian redacted version see, "US embassy cables: Kazakhstan - 

the big four," Guardian, November 29, 2010: http://www.guardian.co.uk/ 

world/us-embassy-cables-documents/245167?INTCMP=SRCH. 

The redaction can be seen visually on the Cablegatesearch website which 

shows the revision history, with the redactions shaded in pink: http://www. 

cablegatesearch.net/cabIe.php?id=10ASTANA72&version=1291113360 

(all finks accessed October 22, 2012). 

109. See, for example, cable reference ID 09TRIPOLI413 about Western 
energy companies operating in Libya. The visual representation on 
the Cablegatesearch website, with the Guardian's redactions shaded 
in pink, shows that the Guardian removed all references to the names 
of energy companies and their executives, except for references to 
Russian energy company Gazprom. Even though some of the content 
is somewhat mitigating for the Western companies, the redactions are 
elaborate, and the redacted version gives quite a different picture: 



182 



CYPHERPUNKS 



http://www.cablegatesearcli. net/cable. php?id=09TRIPOLI413&ver- 
sion= 1296509820 (accessed October 22, 2012). 

110. In this example the original cable contained 5,226 words. The redacted 
version published by the Guardian had only 1,406 words. 

For the original cable see cable reference ID 05SOFIA1207, WikiLeaks: 

http://wikileaks.org/cable/2005/07/05SOFIA1207.html. 

For the Guardian redacted version see, "US embassy cables: Organised 

crime in Bulgaria," December 1, 2010: http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/ 

us-embassy-cables-documents/36013. 

For the Guardian news story based on the cable see, "WikiLeaks 
cables: Russian government "using mafia for its dirty work"," Guardian, 
December 1, 2010: http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/dec/01/ 
wikileaks-cable-spain-russian-mafia. 

The extent ofdie redaction can be seen visually on die Gablegatesearch website 
which shows die revisionhistory, widi die redactions shadedin pink: http://www. 
cablegatesearch.net/cable.php?id=05SOFIA12076wersion= 1291757400. 
This Bulgarian example is discussed by WikiLeaks' Bulgarian media part- 
ner Bivol in, "Unedited cable from Sofia shows the total invasion of the 
state by organized crime (Update: Cable Comparison)," WL Central, 
March 18, 2011: http://wlcentral.org/node/1480. In addition see, "The 
Guardian: Redacting, censoring or lying?" WL Central, March 19, 2012: 
http://wlcentral.org/node/1490. Also of note below both WL Central 
stories is the comment from Guardian journalist David Leigh and the 
responses (all links accessed October 22, 2012). 

111. This refers to cable reference ID 09BERLIN1108. The redactions can 
be seen visually on the Gablegatesearch website which shows the revision 
history, with the redactions shaded in pink: http://www.cablegatesearch. 
net/cable.php?id=09BERLIN1108&version=1291380660 (accessed 
October 22, 2012). 

112. For more examples, see the cabledrum website: www.cabledram.net/ 
pages/censorship.php 

113. "Interception of telecommunications. The Presidency provided informa- 
tion on the state of play... It recalled the negative press that this issue 
has received in the media... Against this background, the Presidency thus 
recognized that progress in this matter is being veiy slow... Several del- 
egations expressed some caution as regards the preparation of a press 
release, noting that this could provoke a chain reaction and further neg- 
ative press in the media. The Commission, whilst noting that its position 
has not changed, informed delegations that a possible way to break the 



183 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



deadlock could be following a similar strategy as that followed in tackling 
the issue of child pornography in the Internet. Although acknowledging 
that this was a different topic it also has an interception dimension" — 
European Commission, Police Co-operation Working Croup meeting 
on interception of telecommunications, October 13-14, 1999. Full docu- 
ment at: http://www.quintessenz.at/doqs/000100002292/1999_10_13,Po- 
lice%20Cooperation%20Working%20Group%20mixed%20commit- 
tee%20meeting.pdf (accessed October 24, 2012). 

114. See the "Note on the various attempts to persecute WUdLeaks and peo- 
ple associated with it" preceding the discussion. 

115. Jacob is referring to Cilmore v. Gonzales, 435 F.3d 1125 (9th Cir. 
2006). John Cilmore, an original eypherpunk, took a case as far as the 
US Supreme Court to disclose the contents of a secret law — a Security 
Directive — restricting citizens' rights to travel on an airplane without 
identification. Besides challenging the constitutionality of such a provi- 
sion, Gilmore was challenging the fact that the provision itself was secret 
and could not be disclosed, even though it has binding effects on US 
citizens. The court consulted the Security Directive in camera, and ruled 
against Gilmore on the Directive's constitutionality. The contents of the 
law were, however, never disclosed during the course of the proceedings. 
See Gilmore v Gonzales at PapersPlease.org: http://papersplease.org/ 
gilmore/faets.html (accessed October 22, 2012). 

116. Christiania is a self-declared self-governing area in Copenhagen, 
Denmark. A former military barracks, it was occupied in the 1970s by a 
broadly collectivist/anarchist community. It has carved out a unique legal 
status in Denmark. 

117. The principle of "net neutrality" (short for network neutrality) requires 
ISPs to be prevented (by law, it is usually argued) from restricting their 
users' access to networks that participate in the internet, including 
restricting content. See the Electronic Frontier Foundation's page on net 
neutrality: https://www.eff.org/issues/net-neutrahty (accessed October 
24, 2012). 

118. "Blocking WikiLeaks emails trips up Bradley Manning prosecution," 
Politico, March 15, 2012: htq}://www.politico.com/blogs/under-the- 
radar/2012/03/blocking-wikileaks-emails-trips-up-bradley-man- 
ning-117573.html (accessed October 21, 2012). 

119. For more information on Wau Holland see the Wau Holland Stiftung: 
http://www.wauland.de 



184 



CYPHERPUNKS 



120. "Stasi still in charge of Stasi files," WikiLeaks, October 4, 2007: http:// 
www.wikileaks.org/wild/Stasi_still_in_charge_of_Stasi_files (accessed 
October 22, 2012). 

121. "Here's what you can do to change the world, right now, to a better ride. 
Take all that money that we spend on weapons and defense each year, 
and instead spend it feeding, clothing and educating the poor of the 
world, which it would many times over, not one human being excluded, 
and we could explore space, together, both inner and outer, forever, in 
peace" — Bill Hicks. For a video of the line being performed see, "Bill 
Hicks — Positive Drugs Story": http://youtu.be/vXlCvW38cHA (accessed 
October 24, 2012). 

122. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is a US law passed in reaction to the cor- 
porate and accounting scandals of Enron, Tyco International, Adelphia, 
Peregrine Systems and WorldCom. The Act aimed to eliminate the same 
corrupt practices that had led to these crises. Section 1107 of the Act, 
codified as USC 1513(e), creates a criminal offense over attempts to 
retaliate against whistleblowers. 

123. Evgeny Morozov, The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom 
(Public Affairs, 2011). 

124. On free software see, "The Free Software Definition," from the website 
of the CNU Operating System: https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw. 
html. 

Free hardware means hardware that is not encumbered by proprietary 
patents, that is constructed to open standards, where there are no laws 
against reverse engineering or tampering (no anti-circumvention laws), 
and where the design principles, instructions and plans are made freely 
available so that anyone else who has them and the necessary resources 
can build a replica. 

For more on free hardware see, "Exceptionally Hard and Soft Meeting: 
exploring the frontiers of open source and DIY," EHSM: http://ehsm. 
eu. See also, "Open-source hardware" on Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia. 
oi'g/wiki/Open-source_hardware (all links accessed October 24, 2012). 

125. On 3D printing using free and open hardware see an introductory video 
to the RepRap 3D printer: http://vimeo.com/5202148 (accessed October 
24, 2012). 

126. "Be the trouble you want to see in the world," is taken from A Softer 
World, a photographic webcomic: http://www.asofterworld.com/index. 
php?id=189 (accessed October 24, 2012). 



185 



JULIAN ASSANGE ET AL. 



127. To follow up on any of the issues raised in the discussion, Jacob recom- 
mends the following two bibliographic resources: 

The Anonymity Bibliography, Selected Papers in Anonymity, curated by 
Roger Dingledine and Nick Mathewson: http://freehaven.net/anonbib 
The Censorship Bibliography, Selected Papers in Censorship, curated by 
Philipp Winter: www.cs.kau.se/philwint/censorbib (both links accessed 
October 24, 2012). 

128. Footnote left intentionally blank. 

129. Nawaat.org is an independent collective blog in Tunisia launched in 2004: 
http://nawaat.org/portail. 

Tunileaks was launched by Nawaat in November 2010, publishing cables 
from WikiLeaks related to Tunisia: https://tunileaks.appspot.com. 
For more on Tunilinks and the Ben-Ali government's censorship efforts 
against it see, "Tunisia: Censorship Continues as Wikileaks Cables 
Make the Rounds," Clobal Voices Advocacy, December 7, 2010: http:// 
advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/07/tunisia-censorship-continues- 
as-wildleaks-cables-make-the-rounds (all links accessed October 24, 2012). 



186 



ALSO FROM OR BOOKS 



The Passion of Bradley Manning 

THE STORY OF THE SUSPECT BEHIND THE 
LARGEST SECURITY BREACH IN U.S. HISTORY 

Chase Madar 

ISBN 978-1-935928-53-9 PAPERBACK 
ISBN 978-1-935928-54-6 E-BOOK 
190 PAGES 



"Author and lawyer Chase Madar tells a great story that raises critical 
questions about the appropriate balance of government secrecy and 
national security in a modern democracy." 

—Anthony D. Romero, Executive Director, American Civil Liberties Union 



"The mistreatment, trial, and fate of Private Bradley Manning will 
undoubtedly read like an obituary on the Obama years. His case is a 
crucial one. Essayist and lawyer Chase Madar turned his sharp eye on 
it early. His will be the single must-read book on the case." 
—Tom Engelhardt, TomDispatch.com 



0 OR Books 

K www.orbooks.com 




